---
layout: article
section: articles
title: 
  "long": "Debt of Gratitude: Lin-Manuel Miranda and the Politics of US Latinx Twitter"
  "short": "Debt of Gratitude"
doi: ""
author: 
- name: Elena Machado Sáez
  shortname: Machado Sáez
  bio: >
    Elena Machado Sáez is... 
date: May 2016
issue: 4
order: 1
abstract: >
  This essay, which engages in an analysis of Lin-Manuel Miranda’s invocation of “for you” on Twitter in comparison to those of twelve other US Latinx writers, has two goals: to identify broader key trends in the discursive strategies used on Latinx Twitter and to make the case for the urgent need to ethically document and archive contemporary Latinx Twitter production. The author moves in the direction of generating a public academic archive of Latinx Twitter by publishing online a limited corpus of Miranda’s “for you” tweets as well as comparative visualizations of how Miranda’s use of “for you” in tweets parallels and differs from other Latinx writers’. In addition to modeling the flawed process of archive-building in the hopes of encouraging other scholars to thoughtfully share their own Twitter archive processes, this essay analyzes the strategies used by some US Latinx creative writers to navigate Twitter and how these strategies may speak to the writers’ understanding of the relationship between institutions, audiences, and aesthetics. It specifically highlights the digital work of Cuban American playwright Marissa Chibas, Puerto Rican poet Rich Villar, and Puerto Rican writer Charlie Vázquez on Twitter as a counternarrative to Miranda’s aesthetics. Much work remains to be done in order to understand how Twitter acts as a vehicle for Miranda and the multitude of US Latinx writers who connect with audiences and each other as a means of translating emotion into action or profit or something else altogether.
language: en
---





Abstract
--------



Introduction
------------

On 17 July 2018, Nuyorican playwright Lin-Manuel Miranda tweeted about
his forthcoming book from Random House, *Gmorning, Gnight! Little Pep
Talks for Me and You*.[^1] Framing it as a cultural product that was
created with a specific audience in mind, Miranda explained, “At YOUR
request, we made a book.”[^2]

% include image.html

img="\[figure-1.png\]"

caption="\[Figure 1. Miranda’s *Little Pep Talks* marketing.\]"

url="\[https://web.archive.org/web/20180717122340/https://twitter.com/lin\_manuel/status/1019190030387073025\]"
%

Miranda’s use of “you” on Twitter more generally reflects a strategic
invocation of his audience. The direct address cultivates intimacy with
an assumed universal subject, in the sense that the follower is not
identified in terms of gender, race, class, or sexuality. Adopting a
grateful caretaker persona, Miranda provides his followers with a daily
routine of feeling appreciated and valued, while also offering advice
about how to adopt a more hopeful and productive outlook on life.
Miranda’s performance of his public persona on social media is of
particular importance because he is one of the US Latinx writers with
the largest followings on Twitter, having broken the
two-million-follower mark in December 2017. A constant stream of
content, whether in the form of a greeting routine or music playlists,
sustains a dynamic of intimacy on Miranda’s Twitter feed. In turn, his
Twitter aesthetic relies on the creation of an emotional debt economy:
providing an excess of expressions of appreciation and gratitude for his
followers so that they feel indebted to him. Appeals to emotion enable
Miranda to mobilize his followers and their purchasing power. Miranda
encourages his followers to invest their time and money in his career as
an artist and in various humanitarian causes. Often blurring the line
between the personal, the profitable, and the political, Miranda’s
Twitter production is productively contextualized by reviewing his prior
marketing strategies for the 2008 Broadway musical *In the Heights* and
his family background in political lobbying.[^3]

This essay engages in a comparative analysis of Miranda’s invocation of
“for you” on Twitter with that of twelve other US Latinx writers with
two goals: to identify broader key trends in the discursive strategies
used on Latinx Twitter as well as to make the case for the urgent need
to ethically document and archive contemporary Latinx Twitter
production. I specifically highlight the digital work of Cuban American
playwright Marissa Chibas, Puerto Rican poet Rich Villar, and Puerto
Rican writer Charlie Vázquez on Twitter as a counternarrative to
Miranda’s aesthetics. US Latinx cultural producers deploy diversity of
aesthetic forms when engaging Twitter as a discursive space. In the
words of theater scholar Patricia Ybarra, there exists a “temptation”
among academics to read US Latinx cultural production as “reveal\[ing\]
an unmediated truth about US Latinx life,” which in turn leads them to
look to such texts “primarily for content, without giving much attention
to form.”[^4] My comparative approach to the landscape of US Latinx
Twitter therefore seeks to avoid this ethnographic lens by addressing
both the form and content of social media work by US Latinx writers.

Social Media, Surveillance, and Affect
--------------------------------------

How Miranda uses Twitter, the way in which he strategically blurs the
boundaries between public and private life, is intimately connected to
the platform’s surveillance and labor dynamics. Twitter’s homepage
invites the reader to “see what’s happening in the world right now,”
situating the social networking service as an entryway into a
contemporary and global public sphere.[^5] The implication is that we
will enter Twitter primarily as observers who will gain access to a
big-picture perspective on contemporary events; however, the power
dynamics behind one’s participation in this public sphere are more
complicated than such advertising indicates. In defining the dynamics of
our contemporary public sphere, I borrow from Christopher Balme’s *The
Theatrical Public Sphere*, which conceptualizes it as a “discursive
arena located between private individuals on the one hand and state
bureaucracy and business on the other” and thereby “occup\[ying\] a
crucial role in the functioning of so-called free or open
societies.”[^6] Twitter forms part of a broader shift in terms of where
public discourse now occurs. Indeed, Balme notes that “changing notions
of spectatorship and publics” have accompanied the “explosion of
Internet communication \[and\] use of social media,” while leading to
questions about “production structures” and how they can be “controlled
or manipulated.”[^7] Private corporations play a more central role in
generating spaces for public discourse, with such spaces codified
according to the logic of profit extraction. As Dorothy Kim argues in
“The Rules of Twitter,” these platforms “have usurped mainstream media
as the main and primary source of on-the-ground, archived, filtered, and
live information.”[^8] The parameters that Twitter uses to structure
discursive exchange matter. After all, as Dorothy Kim and Eunsong Kim
note in “The \#TwitterEthics Manifesto,” “Twitter is a closed, private
corporation,” and, as such, its discursive world is motivated by
profit.[^9] And yet, the lack of transparency makes it challenging to
discern how the corporation dictates the terms of social engagement.

The domination of the public sphere by social media has blurred the
boundary between cultural producer and consumer, in part because of how
central surveillance is to the exchange of information that takes place
on Twitter. When we enter Twitter, we are not merely watching the world
“happen”; we ourselves are being watched. Surveillance is fundamental to
the profit logic of social media, with the data extracted from the
analysis of our behavior translated into the commodity for sale.
Elizabeth Losh helpfully describes in *Hashtag* the way profit is
generated, with social media companies “offering supposedly free content
via targeted advertising and the sale of user data that depends upon
intimate knowledge of users’ personal preferences, emotional sentiments,
and social relations that had previously been unmonetized.”[^10] By
extension, access to the “free” exchange of ideas on Twitter is given in
exchange for the implicit surrender of our selves to corporate
surveillance. Our understanding of surveillance, as Sydette Harry points
out, has been historically defined as “an activity of Big Brother–style”
governance, which limits our ability to perceive the “fannish adulation
and social enmeshment” on social media as part and parcel of its profit
logic.[^11] Surveillance on social media is essentially obligatory if
one wants to engage in the public sphere. Harry provides a useful
definition of surveillance that situates a lack of consent as integral
to its power:

&gt;Surveillance is based on a presumption of entitlement to access, by
right and by force. More importantly, it hinges on the belief that those
surveilled will not be able to reject surveillance—either due to the
consequences of resisting, or the stealth of the observance. They either
won’t say no, or they can’t.[^12]

On the one hand, we are invited by Twitter to feel entitled to access
the world of others, while at the same time, the lack of transparency
about what lies behind its interface means that we do not fully know how
or who is entitled to derive profit from our discursive production
online. Harry emphasizes that “as opting into surveillance becomes
increasingly mandatory to participate in societies and platforms,
surveillance has been woven into the fabric of our lives in ways we can
not readily reject.”[^13] The unique network of shared intimacies that
social media cultivates enables many marginalized peoples to thrive,
which means that finding community online is essential to social
survival. As such, the problem of surveillance is not one that can be
easily avoided if one wants to be an engaged participant in public
discourse, or to put it more simply, if one wants to find belonging and
social support in this contemporary world. It is important to
acknowledge, however, that while consent to surveillance is assumed by
the platforms like Twitter, that does not mean it is actually given.

I am particularly interested in critiques of social media’s social
surveillance logics that focus on how the exploitation of discursive
production online is based on an emotional debt economy. The
intersection of affect and labor on Twitter is best described by Lisa
Nakamura in her essay “The Unwanted Labour of Social Media: Women of
Colour Call Out Culture as Venture Community Management,” in which she
explains that the profit logic of social media platforms relies on
“crowd-sourced labour of internet users” and that such “labour is
uncompensated by wages, \[and\] paid instead by affective currencies
such as ‘likes,’ followers, and occasionally, acknowledgement or praise
from the industry.”[^14] The labor is not merely compensated through
“affective currency.” Venues such as Twitter become discursive spaces
that are “fun, easy, and safe to use” because of producers whose
“openness towards forming new relationships with strangers who want or
need them” allow for “the provision of free advice.” While Nakamura aims
to render visible the “feminised” and “devalued” labor of women of color
on social media platforms, I also find her description of this unique
labor market useful for understanding Miranda’s Twitter aesthetics.[^15]
As a cultural creative who has strengthened his visibility through
social media platforms such as YouTube and Twitter, Miranda is not part
of this exploited class. Rather, he strategically makes intimacy and
affect central to his discursive performance on Twitter, and in so
doing, gains the social “recognition and responsibility” to lobby for
his creative and financial investments.[^16] Miranda uses the affective
dynamics of the debt economy on Twitter to accrue both social and
economic capital.

In the spirit of Macarena Gómez-Barris’s call to “reorient our study
toward the creative praxis and submerged perspectives that are found
beneath or at the edge of the dominant political tide,” I have
endeavored to offer a comparative analysis of Miranda, placing his
Twitter production alongside that of other US Latinx authors.[^17] I
will argue that Miranda’s use of Twitter differs from the way most US
Latinx writers engage the platform, and for this reason, my engagement
with those Latinx creatives also differs. While Miranda conceives of
Twitter as a platform for self-promotion, I endeavor to be attentive to
how the public profiles of other Latinx writers operate in a more minor
key. With discursive production that focuses on activism, affective
survival, and community-building, I consider these Twitter feeds to be
governed by a different set of power dynamics. I believe that my
citation practices require an acknowledgement of how their cultural
production is vulnerable to exploitation within the affective
marketplace of Twitter in a way that Miranda’s is not. For the writers
whose tweets I wanted to reproduce in full here, I requested their
permission to cite their work and, in so doing, I attempted to follow
the directives for ethical academic work laid out by Dorothy Kim in her
essay “Social Media and Academic Surveillance: The Ethics of Digital
Bodies.” Kim condemns current practices of academic research that entail
the harvesting of Twitter production by people of color, challenging the
claim that such production is in the public dominion and therefore does
not require “permission, consent, conversation, and discussion.” She
emphasizes the surveillance logic of Twitter as a “panoptic medium” and
“digital publics” that is “subject to the same problems of surveillance
and ethics we find in geographical space.” By sharing a draft of this
essay with Marissa Chibas, Rich Villar, and Charlie Vázquez prior to
publication and requesting permission to cite their tweets, I hope that
I express respect for the labor that went into producing the “digital
intellectual property” of US Latinx creative writers.[^18] This means
not merely publishing their tweets with their consent, but sharing with
them the context within which I am placing their work, providing them
with the opportunity to speak back to my research and writing process as
well as to request the exclusion of their tweets from analysis.

When I share with literary studies colleagues my decision to obtain
consent, I often get the response that the process for citing tweets
should be similar to citing a published literary work. We do not ask a
creative writer for permission to cite their literary production, so why
should we ask for permission to cite a tweet? I want to reiterate here
that the “public” text of Twitter production is governed by power
dynamics different from those of the traditional object of literary
study, a published book. Shoshana Zuboff discusses a similar false
equivalency in *The Age of Surveillance Capitalism*, while detailing the
unexpected implications of Section 230 from the 1996 Communications
Decency Act. She observes that a journalist translated the import of
this section by noting that an internet company should not be sued for
the malicious content they publish just as a public library would not be
sued for holding a copy of a controversial book. Zuboff helpfully
challenges this comparison by underscoring how an individual’s
interaction with a website as public space does not operate in the same
way as with a public library, the primary difference being that an
individual interacting with a website becomes a resource to be
commodified and exploited:

&gt;Under the regime of surveillance capitalism, content is a source of
behavioral surplus, as is the behavior of the people who enter the
content, as are their patterns of connection, communication, and
mobility, their thoughts and feelings, and the meta-data expressed in
their emoticons, exclamation points, lists, contradictions, and
salutations.[^19]

By contrast, the text we researchers find on a bookshelf in the library
is not tagged with “the records of anyone who may have touched it and
when, their behavior, networks, and so on.” My scholarly relationship to
the production of Latinx writers on Twitter therefore cannot be the same
as my relationship to their literary production of published poetry,
plays, and fiction. Their tweets are part of a surveillance marketplace,
and I cannot simply extricate them or myself from that market dynamic in
order to perform my research. Rather, my research is enabled and
complicit with the forces that commodify their creative production
online. Much of the meaning I can ascribe to their tweets is facilitated
by the fact that social media giants—or as Zuboff calls them, the
surveillance capitalists—have created a platform that functions as a
“diamond mine ready for excavation and plunder, to be rendered into
behavioral data and fed to machines on their way to product fabrication
and sales.”[^20]

At the same time, I must acknowledge that the pseudo-restorative justice
process I embark on to acknowledge the labor of US Latinx writers on
Twitter is aspirational. That process is always a failure because there
is no real way to decouple the tweets from the surveillance dynamics
that they are born into. In addition, I came across Dorothy Kim’s work
on ethics and Twitter *after* I had already performed the research and
writing stages for this project. I pulled tweets, generated charts, and
analyzed these materials before I was able to find the language to
articulate the profound discomfort I experienced while doing all this.
To my friends and colleagues, I apologetically described myself as a
“lurker” on Twitter because I had a Twitter account but no feed; I was
only there to observe out of academic interest. At the same time, I felt
that I was an interloper, that I was trespassing on conversations that
did not necessarily imagine me as a listener. I encountered Kim’s “The
\#TwitterEthics Manifesto” as part of a course she cotaught with Angel
Nieves at the Digital Humanities Institute held at the University of
Victoria in June 2019. Reading it, I was so grateful to finally have a
language by which to explain why and how the research process disturbed
my conscience. It is one thing to gain that confirmation, but it is
quite another to actually do something about it. Frankly, my first
impulse was to just chuck all this research and writing in the garbage
and walk away. In some ways, I know that my desire to cut ties with this
project is also based in a profound insecurity about my ability to do
this work, by which I mean academic work, literary studies work, digital
humanities work. I decided that I would be transparent about my process
and attempt a recuperative form of justice anyway by sharing the essay
with Marissa Chibas, Rich Villar, and Charlie Vázquez, US Latinx writers
who are less visible in certain fields of academia. I did not request
permission from Lin-Manuel Miranda because of the way he frames his feed
as a mainstreaming tool as well as a source for his artistic and
fundraising projects. Understandably, the reactions of Chibas, Villar,
and Vázquez to my queries was mixed, and I share my process for
obtaining consent from those writers in order to at least offer a
cautionary tale of what *not* to do when you embark on Twitter research,
which is: do not start the process for obtaining consent *after* you
begin data collection and analysis because minimizing harm after the
fact is impossible. Obtain consent *before* you begin.

I contacted Chibas, Villar, and Vázquez via e-mail during September
2019, requesting permission to cite their tweets in my essay. In the
message, I explained my project and my goal of publishing it an academic
journal, while also sharing an essay draft so they could assess how I
framed and analyzed their tweets. I closed the message by stating, “If
you don't reply to my query by October 15th, I'll assume that your
preference is that I do NOT cite your tweets.”[^21] My choice of an
“opt-in” process was informed by the collaborative essay “The Ethical
Challenges of Publishing Twitter Data for Research Dissemination,”
shared by my colleague Christian Howard. The essay’s coauthors
understand the primary challenge of Twitter research to be grounded in
how scholars address “fundamental ethical principles such as the
minimization of harm and the value of informed consent.” The researchers
explain that with the “collection of Twitter data, informed consent for
data collection is typically based on user acceptance of its Terms of
Service.”[^22] Of course, “social media users are unlikely to read or
remember” these documents for social media platforms, “undermining the
assumption that informed consent has been given.”[^23] Owing to an
“absence of consensus” about best practices for consent, I chose to
follow the opt-in model because I would be able to assume a nonreply as
an absence of consent.[^24] Chibas and Vázquez both replied to my
queries and e-mailed their permission, while Villar did not reply to two
separate e-mail requests. Chibas responded on 29 September with the
message, “I briefly looked over your doc and it seems just fine to
me. That is quite a substantial piece you are working on.” Vázquez
replied on 20 September, saying, “How very cool…go ahead and use what
you would like. Thanks for including me.”[^25] In addition to
incorporating and analyzing the tweets by Chibas and Vázquez, I embed in
this essay the gaps produced by Villar’s nonconsent so that my writing
symbolically evokes the gaps in my research argument now that my
citation of Villar is not ethically possible—and to document my failure
to request the consent of the rest of the US Latinx writers I include
here. I use black highlighter to render visible the redacted analysis
and Villar tweets in the hope that it more powerfully conveys the
cautionary tale I want to tell about the Twitter data collection process
and its inherent surveillance.

Digital Tools and Methodology
-----------------------------

Since May 2017, I have been accumulating archives of tweets for more
than one hundred Latinx creative writers, from poets to playwrights,
using the programs TAGS Archiver and Twitter Archiver. I did not request
permission from these writers when I set up the automatic process for
collecting tweets. In addition to incorporating creative producers of
different genres, the scope of the project is pan-ethnic, drawing from
the various communities that inform *Latinidad* within the United
States: from the historical populations of Mexican Americans, Puerto
Ricans, and Cuban Americans, to relatively more recent diasporas of the
Dominican Republic, Central America, and South America. I used Voyant to
visualize word patterns and social networks on US Latinx Twitter.
Additionally, I created a searchable archive using the program Oxygen
and then converted a portion of Lin-Manuel Miranda’s Twitter archive
into HTML (hypertext markup language), posting online a temporally
limited collection of “for you” tweets that appeared from May 2017 to
January 2018.[^26]

% include image.html

img="\[figure-2.png\]"

caption="\[Figure 2. An online archive of Miranda’s “for you” tweets.\]"
%

With the aim of distinguishing the unique qualities of Miranda’s Twitter
use, I created text files for over forty other Latinx writers using TAGS
and Twitter Archiver so as to perform a comparative analysis. These
writers included Chantel Acevedo, Daniel Alarcon, John Manuel Arias,
Ruth Behar, Richard Blanco, Nao Bustamante, Daisy Cabrera, Jennine Capó
Crucet, Joy Castro, Raquel Cepeda, Marissa Chibas, Angie Cruz, Migdalia
Cruz, Jaquira Díaz, Kristoffer Diaz, Angel Dominguez, Yalitza Ferrera,
Coco Fusco, Guillermo Gomez Peña, Laurie Guerrero, Daisy Hernandez,
Cristina Henriquez, Quiara Alegria Hudes, John Leguizamo, Aurora Levins
Morales, Natalie Lima, Valeria Luiselli, Urayoan Noel, Achy Obejas,
Daniel Olivas, Monica Palacios, Daniel Peña, Willie Perdomo, Sofia
Quintero, Lilliam Rivera, Awilda Rodríguez Lora, Isaias Rodriguez,
Esmeralda Santiago, Caridad Svich, Hector Tobar, Charlie Vázquez, and
Rich Villar. It is worth noting here that there are several generations
of contemporary Latinx writers who either do not have Twitter accounts
(like Sandra Cisneros, Julia Alvarez, and Ana Menéndez) or they have a
negligible presence (such as Junot Díaz and Ana Maurine Lara). I
winnowed down this initial list to a more select group of authors by
first determining who established a significant audience for their
Twitter production. In selecting my corpus of writers to compare with
Miranda, I also kept in mind how prolific these writers were, with the
goal of selecting those who maintained an active presence on Twitter by
posting original tweets or retweeting.

% include image.html

img="\[figure-3.ods\]"

caption="\[Figure 3. Comparison by number of followers.\]" %

% include image.html

img="\[figure-4.ods\]"

caption="\[Figure 4. Comparison by number of tweets.\]" %

The resulting list of twelve writers is therefore a cross-section of
those Latinx authors with the most followers and the most active tweet
production during approximately a six-month window, from May to November
2017. After selecting these twelve authors for the comparative analysis
with Miranda, I cleaned the text files of the Twitter archives by
removing duplicates, uploading them to Voyant, and editing the list of
stopwords in order to visualize the patterns and distinguishing features
of each Latinx writers’ Twitter use.

% include image.html

img="\[figure-5.png\]"

caption="\[Figure 5. Twitter profiles of twelve Latinx writers.\]" %

Voyant’s term-analysis function and trend-line graph help us compare the
Twitter data for Miranda and the twelve other writers. I analyzed the
top twenty-five most frequently occurring words in the archive using
Voyant. Normally, the word “you” is listed as a stopword, so it gets
pulled out of analysis when analyzing a large corpus. I decided to
remove from the stopword list terms of self-representation (“I,” “am,”
“be”) and affiliation language (“you,” “your,” “we,” “us,” “our”) in
order to get a better picture of the distinctive uses of “you” in Latinx
Twitter. I also added common usernames, tags, and handles to the
stopwords list in order to center the Voyant analysis on the language
content of the tweets. The list of the top twenty-five most frequently
occurring words in the archive therefore highlighted the terminology
used to reference audience and community. A distinctive feature of the
data for the twelve Latinx writers is the predominance of terms such as
“we,” “Trump,” “people,” and “white,” which reflect the centrality of
contemporary political discourse and cultural critique on their Twitter
feeds. Latinx writers are using Twitter as a space to address President
Donald Trump’s nationalist platform and respond directly to the
president’s stoking of racism and anti-immigrant fervor. There is also a
discursive balance present between the use of individualist terms such
as “I,” “my,” and “me” and references to the communal with “we,” “us,”
and “our.” While “Trump” is a popular term found in Miranda’s tweets, it
is not in his top twenty-five words. Miranda’s vocabulary is distinctive
because of the prevalence of earnest intimacy terms (“good,” ‘thanks,”
“love,” “like”) and time (“day,” “morning,” “night”). The relationship
between Miranda’s self and an individual other dominates the wordcloud,
with the references to “I,” “I’m,” “my,” and “me” alongside “you” and
“your.”

The centrality of “you” to Miranda’s Twitter rhetoric is made clearer in
the line graph comparison with other writers. Looking at the raw
frequency of “you” and “your,” reveals that Miranda’s direct references
to his Twitter audience are consistent and distinctive. By contrast, the
references to a collective or kinship with followers, such as “we” and
“us,” reflect a more level playing field amongst the group of thirteen
writers.

% include image.html

img="\[figure-6.png\]"

caption="\[Figure 6. The raw frequency of you in the corpora of thirteen
writers.\]" %

% include image.html

img="\[figure-7.png\]"

caption="\[Figure 7. The raw frequency of “your” in the corpora of
thirteen writers.\]" %

% include image.html

img="\[figure-8.png\]"

caption="\[Figure 8. The raw frequency of “we” in the corpora of
thirteen writers.\]" %

% include image.html

img="\[figure-9.png\]"

caption="\[Figure 9. The raw frequency of “us” in the corpora of
thirteen writers.\]" %

Miranda’s self-representation and affiliation on Twitter relies upon a
discursive labor, producing original content and emotional affirmation
for his followers. In order to compare Miranda’s rhetorical strategies
with those of the twelve other Latinx writers, I focused on the use of
the specific phrase “for you,” during the period of 10 May and 15
November 2017. Analyzing the use of “for you” in a combined archive of
over thirty-three thousand tweets facilitated a much more manageable
review process for me as the lone investigator of the project. With this
corpus, I removed all the retweets, focusing solely the authors’
original production of messages and therefore direct references to
audience. While statistically less significant than the use of “you,”
the “for you” archive permitted a close reading of individual tweets and
a more in-depth comparison of discursive strategies. I correlated the
number of “to you” references with the total number of tweets produced
during the May to November time period. It is worth pointing out the
contrast that the chart reveals between Miranda and John Leguizamo, who
produced a similar number of tweets during the same time period but had
significantly fewer mentions of “for you.” Such a divergence reveals
that while Miranda and Leguizamo have similar rates of productivity and
engagement with their Twitter followers, the “for you” usage indicates a
divergent set of writerly strategies for engaging that audience. The
writers who use “to you” at rates to Miranda are authors who have a
significantly smaller set of followers and are less active on Twitter:
Cuban American playwright Marissa Chibas, Puerto Rican poet Rich Villar,
and Puerto Rican writer Charlie Vázquez.

% include image.html

img="\[figure-10.ods\]"

caption="\[Figure 10. A comparison of “for you” usage in original tweets
(with retweets removed).\]" %

Concentrating on the phrase “for you” as a lens of comparison makes
explicit a tweet’s reference to a relational dynamic. “For you” often
connotes a presentation or act of gifting, whereby one individual
creates or assembles something for another. More importantly, the phrase
functions as an indicator for how the writer imagines and situates the
audience of followers. By close reading the tweets in the corpus, we see
that the Twitter usage trends of cultivating intimacy and articulating
an activist politics are expressed using different strategies.

% include image.html

img="\[figure-11.ods\]"

caption="\[Figure 11. A breakdown of sixty-five “for you” tweets by
Miranda.\]" %

% include image.html

img="\[figure-12.ods\]"

caption="\[Figure 12. A breakdown of forty-five “for you” tweets by
twelve Latinx writers.\]" %

Miranda uses Twitter to articulate concerns similar to those of other
Latinx writers, namely, using the “you” to relate to a general audience
of Twitter followers or to articulate an activist politics. The
difference is that the percentage of tweets dedicated to these interests
is flipped. Miranda dedicates 75 percent of his tweets to cultivating
intimacy with a general Twitter audience and 11 percent on
activism-related topics. As a group, the twelve Latinx writers dedicate
48 percent of their tweets to activism, 31 percent to expressing
gratitude to specific creative producers (other writers, for example),
and 17 percent to cultivating intimacy with a general Twitter audience.
A different relationship also emerges between their Twitter aesthetic
and activism. The phrase “for you” is most often used to refer to a
specific individual, as opposed to the entire audience of followers.
Additionally, these Latinx authors do not produce original content on
Twitter. Rather, they network with particular individuals, retweeting in
order to amplify voices of others.

Activism Online: Marissa Chibas, Rich Villar, and Charlie Vázquez
-----------------------------------------------------------------

The activism of US Latinx writers finds expression via their messages of
gratitude for a specific person’s actions or in critical posts about
President Trump and his followers. Cuban American playwright Marissa
Chibas’s feed serves as one example of how Latinx writers use Twitter
predominantly as a space for political activism as well as to build
constructive relationships with specific progressive individuals.

% include image.html

img="\[figure-13.ods\]"

caption="\[Figure 13. “For you” tweets by Chibas.\]" %

Within this select group of tweets, we see Chibas replying in support of
US senator for California Kamala Harris; the mayor of San Juan Puerto
Rico, Carmen Yulín Cruz Soto; former president Barack Obama; the actor
Don Cheadle; US representative for California Adam Schiff; and
California state senate president Kevin de León. These are public
figures rather than people whom Chibas knows personally. Her tweets
therefore seek to foster a productive dialogue with political actors,
not simply to network with them but to reaffirm her commitment and
support. She also includes President Trump on her reply to de León as a
means of confirming de León’s critique of the administration’s decision
to pull out of the Paris climate accord.

% include image.html

img="\[figure-14.png\]"

caption="\[Figure 14. Chibas’s reply to Kamala Harris.\]"

url="\[http://web.archive.org/web/20181228214913/https://twitter.com/i/web/status/914202773775818752\]"
%

Such tweets represent Chibas’s efforts to intercede in political
discourse concerning the US government’s response to Puerto Rican
disaster relief as well as more general critiques of President Trump.

When tweets work to build intimacy with a general audience, the creative
writer is posting messages to request emotional support or advice, as we
can see in the case of Puerto Rican poet Rich Villar. His “for you”
tweets fall into the same top three categories as the tweets of the
other Latinx writers: critiques of President Trump, requests for
support, and expressions of gratitude to specific creative producers.
Villar’s tweets to Trump are comical and sarcastic replies to the
president’s tweets; for example, in an August 2017 tweet in which Trump
instructs his followers to “study what General Pershing of the United
States did to terrorists when caught,” Villar refers Trump to the
powerful and well-funded agencies he has at his disposal. Villar also
replies to Trump’s announcement about signing the 2017 Veterans
Educational Assistance Act by informing the president, “\[I have a\]
resignation letter for you to sign.” The tenor of these tweets is
confrontational, performing a kind of rhetorical protest, questioning
the legitimacy of the president’s claim on historical precedent and
political authority.

% include image.html

img="\[figure-15.ods\]"

caption="\[Figure 15. “For you” tweets by Villar.\]" %

By contrast, Villar’s tweet to his followers about a “dream job”
application requests “support, prayers, candles, santos, coins in the
ocean...whatever!” This plea imagines a community of intimates who would
not only invest in his success but also be familiar with Latinx
spiritual practices. Additionally, he specifically thanks African
American queer photographer Gioncarlo Valentine for his creative
“energy.” Villar’s tweet demonstrates how Latinx writers imagine
themselves as part of “other” public spheres. The messages of gratitude
speak to and actively construct a kinship with creative producers of
color and queer communities in the United States.

When Latinx writers imagine their followers as a cohort, that “you”
carries a communal reference. For instance, Puerto Rican author Charlie
Vázquez’s “shout-out” parenthetically translates the “you” to “us” in
imagining the shared familial context of absent fathers.[^27]

% include image.html

img="\[figure-16.png\]"

caption="\[Figure 16. Vázquez on fatherhood.\]"

url="\[http://web.archive.org/web/20181230013539/https://twitter.com/charlievazquez/statuses/876499382488707075\]"
%

% include image.html

img="\[figure-17.png\]"

caption="\[Figure 17. Vázquez for “tested.”\]"

url="\[https://web.archive.org/web/20181230013652/https://twitter.com/charlievazquez/statuses/869669182526435332\]"
%

Similarly, his tweet offering support to people “close” to him who “are
being tested” aims to publicly display his offer, “I am here for
you.”[^28] The transition from “people” to “you” shifts a third-person
subject into the second person, establishing an intimate relationship on
the platform of social media. At the same time, this declaration seeks
to articulate a specific ethics to the general audience of followers,
implying that they too should adopt “selflessness” as the “word for this
season.” Miranda is not alone in his strategic invocation of intimacy on
Twitter via the phrase “for you.” Nonetheless, he is perhaps the Latinx
writer who most actively cultivates a Twitter persona using a habitual
practice of performing and modeling intimacy and affect.

Lobbying, the Miranda Family Business
-------------------------------------

Critics of US Latinx literary studies often situate Lin-Manuel Miranda
as part of a broader history of US Latinx political activism. For
example, in an essay summarizing the development of US Latinx theater,
Ricardo L. Ortíz offers Miranda as an example of how US Latinx creatives
“have not only made their mark thanks to unprecedented critical and
commercial success, but have done so while adhering uncompromisingly
(each in its own way) to a vision of US political, social, and cultural
life within which Latinos and other people of color figure not just
prominently but centrally.”[^29] Miranda’s emblematic status as both
artist and activist is credited to how he foregrounds US Latinx life and
bodies on stage. While I am interested in troubling the progressive
potential of representational politics, I am limiting myself here to
complicating the notion of a shared vision of activism, specifically by
distinguishing between how US Latinx writers and Miranda deploy Twitter
as a tool for activism. In terms of their rhetoric, US Latinx writers
draw on a vocabulary of collective action in their tweets, imagining the
relationship between their individual self and a “we” of followers.
Miranda, on the other hand, focuses on imagining his audience on Twitter
in terms of an individualistic “you.” Miranda thus frames his tweets as
an interaction or conversation between individuals, which in turn
facilitates his calls for financial activism, requesting that his
followers donate money toward causes he values. Before delving into
concrete examples of how his deployment of “you” differs from that of
other US Latinx writers, I contextualize Miranda’s discursive strategies
within a unique family history of neoliberal activism. By *neoliberal*,
I mean that the Miranda family views activism in terms of the
accumulation of capital, with money as the primary means of building
political power and effecting social change.

Miranda mobilized his followers to support, through financial donations,
the hurricane recovery efforts in Puerto Rico, for example, with the
\#AlmostLikePraying benefit song project, which involved the production
of original content (the song, video, and documentary). Hurricane Maria
made landfall in Puerto Rico on 20 September 2017. On 6 October, Miranda
released the song “Almost Like Praying” and the Spotify playlist *Puerto
Ricans for Puerto Rico* as fundraising tools for recovery relief. All
proceeds from downloads and streams of “Almost Like Praying” go the
Hispanic Federation's disaster relief fund to aid Puerto Rico.[^30]
Miranda’s Twitter feed was a key method in marketing the benefit song
project and an overview of his tweets for that year reveals how
promoting it dominated his feed. During the period of May 2017 to
February 2018, the top hashtags for Lin-Manuel Miranda’s feed were
\#Ham4Ham (133), \#AlmostLikePraying (73), \#ForPR (39), \#PuertoRico
(25), \#PorPR (25), \#Hamildrop (25), \#AmWriting (20), \#HamForHam
(18), and \#HamiltonLDN (15). The hashtags evoke the enthusiasm over all
things *Hamilton*, which was enhanced by the musical’s reiteration as
its own preshow in *Ham4Ham*.[^31] The intertwining of the musical’s
marketing with the recovery activism hashtags is also evidenced in
Miranda’s return to the title role in January 2019, ostensibly to
generate tourism for hurricane-ravaged Puerto Rico.

In addition to the rhetorical strategies that Miranda typically uses to
build affective alliances with his Twitter followers, a family
background of neoliberal activism is central to analyzing Miranda’s
response to the hurricane Maria recovery efforts. In an exemplary
fundraising tweet on 5 October 2017, Miranda uses the first-person “I”
to engage a “ya’ll” of followers to financially commit themselves to
supporting the recovery project by donating to nonprofit organizations
such as MoveOn.org, a 501(c)(4), and the Hispanic Federation, a
501(c)(3).[^32] Miranda’s support of the Hispanic Federation in
particular requires some contextualization, since his father Luis A.
Miranda was a cofounder of the nonprofit in 1990 and served as its first
president. Ethical concerns have long been raised about the relationship
between Luis Miranda’s lobbying group MirRam and the Hispanic
Federation.[^33] At the least, Lin-Manuel Miranda’s centering of the
Hispanic Federation as a key player in the Puerto Rican hurricane
recovery efforts can be interpreted as relying on similar a marketing
dynamic and rhetoric to that of his self-promotion tweets.

% include image.html

img="\[figure-18.png\]"

caption="\[Figure 18. Miranda’s \#AlmostLikePraying.\]"

url="\[http://web.archive.org/web/20181231011310/https://twitter.com/lin\_manuel/status/915951732517154817\]"
%

Asking followers to make financial commitments or to contribute their
volunteer labor requires mobilizing a community with whom an artist has
weak ties, people who are not part of his or her immediate personal or
professional network. Miranda’s calls for political or humanitarian
action require the cultivation of intimacy with a community who will
primarily respond with financial investment: buying music or making
donations.

Miranda invests in a specific type of political action that is deeply
rooted in the model of what I am choosing to call the Miranda family
business: lobbying. In 2015 the veteran Puerto Rican reporter Juan
González published in the *New York Daily News* an article about “the
huge role” of the Miranda family in “nurturing” Miranda, whom González
refers to as “this new genius of our stage.” He notes that Miranda’s
father, Luis A. Miranda Jr., has been a “well-known leader in the Latino
community” since he worked in Mayor Ed Koch’s Democratic administration,
which governed the city from 1977 until 1989. González also reveals that
Luis Miranda’s private political consulting firm, the MirRam Group, “has
handled much of his son's schedule since Lin-Manuel's breakthrough
Tony-winning musical *In the Heights* in 2008.” For González,
*Hamilton*’s representation of the political landscape during the
American Revolution is drawn from the younger Miranda’s familial
experience: “As for how those politicians wielded power, Miranda learned
from his dad.” He quotes Miranda’s own reflection as a fly on the wall
for political strategy sessions: “I was the little kid drawing in the
corner when my father was in all those meetings.”[^34] In other words,
Miranda was in the room where it happens, one of the many private spaces
where political actors make decisions about public policy and political
strategy.

The \#Ham4All challenge of June 2017 is a useful precursor to the
marketing and activism web of the \#AlmostLikePraying benefit song.[^35]

% include image.html

img="\[figure-19.png\]"

caption="\[Figure 19. Miranda’s \#Ham4All challenge.\]"

url="\[http://web.archive.org/web/20170628051129/https://twitter.com/lin\_manuel/status/879323738398916608\]"
%

Miranda asked fans to post videos of themselves singing to *Hamilton*
songs after donating to the Immigrants: We Get the Job Done Coalition.
The Hispanic Federation project’s name was derived from the lyrics of
the song “Immigrants: We Get the Job Done” on the *Hamilton Mixtape*
album that Miranda released in December 2016. In 2017, the federation
adopted this catchphrase as the name for its alliance of nonprofit
organizations addressing the needs of US Latinx communities.[^36] As
previously mentioned, one of the Hispanic Federation’s cofounders is
Miranda’s father*,* Luis Miranda. According to a 2014 newsletter by the
National Institute for Latino Public Policy, the elder Miranda was
installed as the first president of the nonprofit Hispanic Federation in
1990 “through the direct intervention of then NYC Mayor Ed Koch”:
“Miranda had served as Koch's Hispanic Advisor, a position that brought
him much criticism from the Puerto Rican community that found Koch's
neoconservative policies antithetical to its interests.”[^37] Also
mentioned earlier, all the proceeds of the 2018 \#AlmostLikePraying
campaign go to the Hispanic Federation. In 2000, Luis Miranda left the
administration of the Hispanic Federation (although as recently as 2014
he remained listed as a paid lobbyist) to head the consulting and
lobbying firm MirRam Groupa along with former New York City assemblyman
and Democratic chairman Roberto Ramirez. Based on the research
*CityLimits* performed in 2013 via New York City’s campaign finance
database, MirRam was identified as one of the top six firms that “earned
more than half a million dollars for campaign work.”[^38]

The musical *Hamilton* plays an important role in facilitating the
influence of a familial political network that is housed in the
organizations of the Hispanic Federation and the MirRam Group. For
example, MirRam “quietly created The Hamilton Campaign Network as a
sister company to consult on state and city campaigns.” A MirRam
spokesman explained that the “name is topical with all of the renewed
political interest on Hamilton as a historical figure.” As noted by the
*Daily News*, “The idea to separate out the lobbying and communications
work of MirRam from the campaign work now done by Hamilton \[Campaign
Network\] comes at a time when how Albany operates has come under
increasing criticism and investigations.”[^39]

% include image.html

img="\[figure-20.png\]"

caption="\[Figure 20. The Hamilton Campaign Network.\]"

url="\[http://web.archive.org/web/20170628051129/https://twitter.com/lin\_manuel/status/879323738398916608\]"
%

% include image.html

img="\[figure-21.png\]"

caption="\[Figure 21. Miranda’s “in the meantime.”\]"

url="\[http://web.archive.org/web/20170921161517/https://twitter.com/lin\_manuel/status/910769261479677953\]"
%

% include image.html

img="\[figure-22.png\]"

caption="\[Figure 22: Miranda on austerity protests in Puerto Rico.\]"

url="\[http://web.archive.org/web/20180901232440/https://twitter.com/lin\_manuel/status/991782264659939328\]"
%

% include image.html

img="\[figure-23.png\]"

caption="\[Figure 23. Miranda’s “new path” with Hispanic Federation.\]"

url="\[http://web.archive.org/web/20181231191605/https://twitter.com/lin\_manuel/status/913024298654273536\]"
%

While the collaboration of consulting and campaign organizations is
legal, ethical questions have been raised about the undue influence such
firms have by helping elect officials and then proceeding to lobby those
same politicians. Access and influence are the top priorities of
lobbying groups and Miranda’s Twitter aesthetic mobilizes his followers’
emotional capital and financial investment into specific political
priorities that also further advance the Miranda family’s political
networks. For example, just a day after Hurricane Maria’s landfall,
Miranda casually integrated a recommendation for donations to be
directed toward the Hispanic Federation “in the meantime.”[^40] No
explanation is given in the tweet for why the Hispanic Federation is
chosen as Miranda’s stopgap measure; however, a family history of
connections to the organization certainly makes clear that this remark
is strategic. The intersection of art and politics, emotional and
financial lobbying, is developed further in a tweet that follows that
same week, accompanied by a photograph of Miranda’s son’s toy train set,
which provides the metaphor for donations to Puerto Rican recovery
efforts.[^41] Miranda weaves a rhetoric of intimacy, using his good
morning greeting to paint a picture of his domestic sphere, the toy
train as a visual for his wife’s daily commute. The private is made
public in order to gather his followers into a collective “we” that will
similarly embark on “new paths” by donating to the Hispanic Federation.
That call for donations was incredibly successful. As the *New York
Times* noted in December 2018, “After the hurricane, the Mirandas helped
raised \$43 million for the Hispanic Federation’s hurricane relief
fund.”[^42] Miranda’s reliance on the Hispanic Federation as his primary
avenue for donations after Hurricane Maria’s devastation can be credited
to family lessons learned on the campaign trail—that it is best to use
an established network of contacts. Despite the intimacy cultivated by
Miranda on his Twitter feed, the personal historiography of the Hispanic
Federation is something Miranda does not tweet about, even though this
relationship is by no means a secret but one that can be easily
discovered with a mere Google search. When the relationship between
Miranda and his family is acknowledged, it is done uncritically and
without a sense of how it might impact the focus of his philanthropy and
even benefit his family financially.[^43]

The Guy Who Makes You (Feel) Things: Lin-Manuel Miranda
-------------------------------------------------------

The bonds of virtual intimacy are accomplished via Miranda’s rhetorical
labor as emotional caretaker and as a DJ, a musical mood producer, for
his Twitter followers or, as his bio profile in January 2018 declared,
the guy who is “making you things.”[^44]

Miranda’s unique use of affiliation language builds an affective or
emotional intimacy between his individual self “I” and communal “you” of
followers. The aesthetic of intimacy provides a foundation for political
activism on Twitter, mobilizing a “we” or “us” of followers. In a 2015
*Hollywood Reporter* interview, Miranda describes the power of art,
pitting it against the work of politics: “Art engenders empathy in a way
that politics doesn't, and in a way that nothing else really does. Art
creates change in people's hearts. But it happens slowly.”[^45] Miranda
frames the ethical obligation of art in terms of emotion and
identification as an alternative to political activism. He reiterates
this goal on Twitter in response to the comment of a follower about a
playlist, saying, “It is literally my job…to make you feel things.”
Miranda explains that he has “tons of practice” in producing art in
order to cultivate specific feelings in the spectator.[^46]

% include image.html

img="\[figure-24.png\]"

caption="\[Figure 24. Screenshot of Miranda’s bio profile, January
2018.\]" %

% include image.html

img="\[figure-25.png\]"

caption="\[Figure 25. Miranda’s “job description.”\]"

url="\[http://web.archive.org/web/2018\*/https://twitter.com/lin\_manuel/status/897242937788125184\]"
%

His strategies for fostering intimacy with his Twitter followers finds
its origins in the online marketing of his first musical. Elizabeth
Titrington Craft’s research on Miranda’s use of YouTube for the
promotion of *In the Heights* suggests that this social medium provided
the means for Miranda to practice the discursive strategies that he
currently uses on Twitter. In her essay “‘Is This What It Takes Just to
Make It to Broadway?!’: Marketing *In the Heights* in the Twenty-First
Century,” Craft analyzes the “twenty-three quasi-homemade videos posted
by ‘Lin-Manuel’ on ‘usnavi’s channel’ on YouTube,” arguing that the
“character-creator link between Miranda and Usnavi blurs the boundaries
of ownership, suggesting these are personal contributions as well as
products of the show.” The performance of this online persona, of
Miranda producing videos as himself via the musical’s fictional
character’s channel, is a precursor to how he deploys emotion and affect
as @Lin\_Manuel on Twitter in order to mobilize his audience. On
YouTube, Miranda began “to fluidly cross boundaries between promotion
and serious political commentary,” setting the stage for his full
integration on Twitter. Key to synthesizing politics with the market is
Miranda’s “enthusiasm for the internet and his ubiquitous presence
\[that\] humanizes the show and its online promotional efforts.”[^47]
Maintaining an active presence on YouTube, “regularly feeding new
content to fans,” Miranda expanded the appeal of *In the Heights* beyond
the traditional boundaries of Broadway. At the same time, producing new
videos also translated into keeping the fans “continually engaged,
bringing them into a community.”[^48]

Miranda’s Twitter feed similarly cultivates a unique persona, one whose
labor “for you” emulates that of an earnest, empathetic caregiver who
cares about his individual followers and “everything” else.[^49] On this
social medium, Miranda constructs an individualistic “I” as a self in
the service of a community of intimates. Using the relational language
of “for you,” Miranda produces original content for his followers as
well as instructive messages about self-help enlightenment. The messages
about advice and instruction comprise one-fourth of the intimacy
rhetoric. Such advice is often predicated on Miranda functioning as a
role model or representative agent for his followers. If we look more
closely, analyzing only the corpus of “for you” tweets using Voyant, we
find gratitude to be a rhetorical move that bolsters the intimate
dynamics of Miranda’s Twitter account.

% include image.html

img="\[figure-26.png\]"

caption="\[Figure 26. Miranda’s caregiver persona.\]"

url="\[https://web.archive.org/web/20181231001111/https://twitter.com/lin\_manuel/status/874250737408192514\]"
%

% include image.html

img="\[figure-27.png\]"

caption="\[Figure 27. Wordcloud of the top twenty-five words within
Miranda’s “for you” corpus.\]" %

% include image.html

img="\[figure-28.ods\]"

caption="\[ Figure 28. List of the top twenty-five words within
Miranda’s “for you” corpus.\]" %

% include image.html

img="\[figure-29.png\]"

caption="\[Figure 29. Miranda’s gnight gratitude.\]"

url="\[https://web.archive.org/web/20171114041014/https://twitter.com/lin\_manuel/status/930263949509124101\]"
%

By adding “you”-derived terminology to the stoplist (for example,
“yours,” “you’re,” “yourself”) as well as references to emojis (flag,
heart, hand), the Voyant wordcloud for the top twenty-five words reveals
more clearly the centrality of Miranda’s performance of gratitude for
his audience. This performance entails expressing gratitude for the
support of Twitter followers, predominantly for a universal “you” rather
than specific mentions of individuals.

In data scraping Miranda’s Twitter account, I find that his rhetorical
strategies on Twitter cultivate a caretaker/coach persona with a
pedagogical investment in gratitude. When a follower, Ryan P. C.
Trimble, comments on their desire to “reach @Lin\_Manuel levels” of
self-fulfilling creativity—“casting myself in things I write”—Miranda
generates a post for all his Twitter followers that outlines an “easy”
course of action: to acknowledge that there is a dearth of roles for
actors of color, to start writing your dream role yourself, and to
repeat this process of recognition and creative production.[^50]

Miranda’s tweets often adopt this instructional tone, with a
step-by-step outline, as in, for example, a May 2017 tweet that directs
his followers, “Tell someone you’re grateful for them.” Miranda
instructs on the benefits of maintaining such an ethos of gratitude,
encouraging his audience to “mean it,” and pairs this directive with the
promise that “it feels good.” Miranda then models that very process,
saying that he himself is “grateful” for his audience.[^51] The promise
of feeling part of a greater emotional good is fundamental to the
intimate relationship Miranda seeks to build with his Twitter followers.
The advice tweets are thereby bolstered by claims on the universal
follower’s affect, through an implicit reciprocity.

% include image.html

img="\[figure-30A.png\]"

caption="\[Figure 30a. Miranda’s instruction.\]"

url="\[https://web.archive.org/web/20181231001344/https://twitter.com/lin\_manuel/status/911353178049908736\]"
%

% include image.html

img="\[figure-30B.png\]"

caption="\[Figure 30b. Miranda’s pedagogy.\]"

url="\[https://web.archive.org/web/20170612134319/https://twitter.com/lin\_manuel/status/859658638629232640\]"
%

Miranda’s performance on Twitter makes evident his investment in the
audience’s ability to repay in kind, to yield positive emotion in
response to his belief in the intrinsic good of his followers. Miranda
advocates a kind of carpe diem philosophy in his tweets, often through
the routine of greeting and expressing gratitude for his followers in
the morning and evening. The success of this routine is manifested in
the publication of his tweets in book form by Random House, which
describes them as “pep talks.” This routine is a key facet of how
Miranda builds affective alliances with his audience and can bank on
their emotional investment when he needs to mobilize his followers.

% include image.html

img="\[figure-31.png\]"

caption="\[Figure 31. A 2016 gratitude tweet with *Singing in the
Rain*.\]"

url="\[https://web.archive.org/web/20181231003845/https://twitter.com/lin\_manuel/status/814681177776881665\]"
%

% include image.html

img="\[figure-32.png\]"

caption="\[Figure 32. A 2016 gratitude tweet with Marilyn Monroe.\]"

url="\[https://web.archive.org/web/20181231004056/https://twitter.com/Lin\_Manuel/status/800456077615702016\]"
%

Miranda reinforces this grateful caretaker persona by generating music
playlists for his followers, which comprise a third of the “for you”
messages. These mixes musically imbibe the particular emotion or theme
Miranda chooses to emphasize on a given day. Twitter serves as a vehicle
for Miranda not simply to make things for his followers but to maintain
a vibrant emotional connection with them. An exchange takes place when
Miranda shares a music mix that translates a specific mood. He embodies
an ethics of empathy, acknowledging the emotional needs of a universal
follower and offering a music mix that can satisfy those needs. The
labor involved in the production of original content becomes
particularly evident in the queries from followers about when Miranda
will share his next compilation of music. These requests reveal that
Miranda’s audience comes to rely on the routine of sharing music, that
this form of cultural production generates important ties between the
playwright and members of his social media audience. Nonetheless, such
requests also hint at the impossibility of sustaining such a project—is
a follower ever going to feel satisfied with the rate of mixtape
production? The challenge of cultivating intimacy online is that it
requires an excess, at a nearly inhuman rate, of curation and cultural
production. The greeting routine of expressing appreciation for
followers or at least acknowledging their presence and investment in
maintaining contact is one way that Miranda attempts to stay relevant on
a daily basis with his millions of followers.

% include image.html

img="\[figure-33.png\]"

caption="\[Figure 33. A Miranda Spotify mixtape announcement.\]"

url="\[http://web.archive.org/web/20181231004829/https://twitter.com/lin\_manuel/status/861543416563412992?lang=en\]"
%

% include image.html

img="\[figure-34.png\]"

caption="\[Figure 34. Miranda’s “Any other questions?” response to a
playlist request.\]"

url="\[https://web.archive.org/web/20181231005014/https://twitter.com/Lin\_Manuel/status/897068921857220608\]"
%

% include image.html

img="\[figure-35.png\]"

caption="\[Figure 35. Miranda’s “Nope” response to a playlist
request.\]"

url="\[https://web.archive.org/web/20181231005149/https://twitter.com/Lin\_Manuel/status/902295847630725120\]"
%

The “for you” invocation is also a vehicle for self-promotion, marketing
Miranda’s various artistic projects, from the journey of the musical
*Hamilton* beyond the Broadway stage to Miranda’s Disney films. While
the fewest tweets are dedicated to these projects, at least in relation
to the whole corpus of tweets, they do require mobilization of Miranda’s
followers. In other words, the affective affiliation that is cultivated
by the production of instructive messages, expressions of gratitude, and
mixtape curation facilitates the financial success of Miranda’s other
creative projects. The promotional appeals likewise share an emotional
valence. In a May 2017 tweet, Miranda works in advance promotion of his
voice-over character Gizmoduck in Disney’s reboot of the show *Duck
Tales*. Rather than introduce the name or date of when the show would
air (neither of which are mentioned), Miranda instead frames the image
of his character with an expression of gratitude for his followers and
the expectation that they will see it when it airs that summer. The
tweet then builds on a sense of indebtedness, which begins with
Miranda’s gratitude but ends with the gesture expected in reply—the
audience’s consumption of his cultural production.[^52]

% include image.html

img="\[figure-36.png\]"

caption="\[Figure 36. Miranda as Gizmoduck.\]"

url="\[https://web.archive.org/web/20181231005502/https://twitter.com/lin\_manuel/status/865598673278906368\]"
%

% include image.html

img="\[figure-37.png\]"

caption="\[Figure 37. Miranda’s *Moana* marketing.\]"

url="\[https://web.archive.org/web/20181231005718/https://twitter.com/lin\_manuel/status/684742849892642817\]"
%

Miranda’s tweet about the 2016 Disney film *Moana* follows an identical
invocation as that of *Duck Tales* but elevates the cultural product or
fictional character to the status of a human subject. The tweet frames
the sneak peak of the film in terms of Miranda’s desire to introduce his
followers to Moana: “I can’t wait.”[^53] Such terminology reverberates
with the power dynamic of his followers requesting his mixtapes,
invoking the same emotions of eagerness, anticipation, and hope.
Expressions of affect translate into claims on future financial
investment. Whereas the followers were the ones making requests, here it
is Miranda who now places expectations on his audience to provide the
emotional and financial support of his creative projects.

In terms of Miranda’s tweets relating to political activism, the “you”
changes from referencing universal followers to specific personas, such
as President Trump or the Dreamers. The dominant emotive valence of the
messages tends toward that of empathy, with the exception of Trump. For
example, Miranda posted expressions of sympathy regarding the August
2017 mass shooting tragedy in San Antonio, Texas, and Hurricane Maria’s
disastrous landfall in Dominica and Puerto Rico in September 2017.[^54]

% include image.html

img="\[figure-38.png\]"

caption="\[Figure 38. Miranda on the mass shooting in San Antonio,
Texas.\]"

url="\[https://web.archive.org/web/20181231010452/https://twitter.com/Lin\_Manuel/status/901096336862449669\]"
%

{% include image.html

img="\[figure-39.png\]"

caption="\[Figure 39. Miranda’s reaction to Hurricane Maria.\]"

url="\[https://web.archive.org/web/20181231010634/https://twitter.com/Lin\_Manuel/status/909895086061887488\]"
%}

Noticeably, these references to a specific population that has suffered
trauma are paired with a change in Miranda’s self-referential language.
Rather than retain a first-person voice, Miranda uses a plural form, a
concerned and empathetic “we” in the cases of Texas and a community
based on an ancestral lineage with Hurricane Maria. The rhetorical
invocation of a shared community in struggle is also evident in the
September 2017 tweet about the “dreamers.”[^55] The message passes along
important information that was first posted by Senator Kamala Harris
about the status renewal deadline for young immigrants in the United
States. At the same time, Miranda’s contribution adds and affirms the
existence of a supportive national community. Such moments of public
commentary function as a form of activism that primarily focuses on
rhetorically instantiating community. Miranda here reverts to a
third-person narrative while implying that he acts as a member of a
community that is “fighting” for immigrant rights.

% include image.html

img="\[figure-40.png\]"

caption="\[Figure 40. Miranda on dreamers.\]"

url="\[https://web.archive.org/web/20181231010851/https://twitter.com/Lin\_Manuel/status/906176961998979072\]"
%

The messages to Donald Trump take on an unusual tone in terms of the
dominant emotional valence Miranda usually adopts in his tweets. Here,
Miranda deploys the phrase “for you” to articulate a critique of the
president’s failure to adequately support the hurricane recovery efforts
in Puerto Rico**.** Both messages also rely on a third-person narrative,
such that the “you” as personal address to Trump is not part of an
intimate relationship of exchange. Additionally, the theme of waiting
returns from the promotional tweets, but the expectation is quite
different. Americans are depicted as awaiting the ethical behavior of
the president, and when that behavior is found lacking, Miranda asserts
that it is Trump who will not have to wait for his cosmic
comeuppance.[^56]

% include image.html

img="\[figure-41.png\]"

caption="\[Figure 41. Miranda on Trump’s response to Hurricane María.\]"

url="\[https://web.archive.org/web/20181231011019/https://twitter.com/Lin\_Manuel/status/912323044269490184\]"
%

% include image.html

img="\[figure-42.png\]"

caption="\[Figure 42. Miranda on Trump’s destination.\]"

url="\[https://web.archive.org/web/20181231011144/https://twitter.com/Lin\_Manuel/status/914102927744217088\]"
%

Miranda’s near silence regarding the 1 May 2018 protests in Puerto Rico
against austerity measures is suggestive of the neoliberal limits to
basing an articulation of philanthropy or ethics on affective
affiliation. Thousands of protestors in San Juan took to the streets on
International Workers’ Day, and the demonstration was predominantly
peaceful until later in the day when the police used physical force and
tear gas. The protest was covered by major news outlets such as NPR and
the *New York Times*; however, Miranda dedicated only a single tweet to
the event. Miranda’s response relies on emotive language, emphasizing
his individual reaction as “heartbroken” and “frustrated.”[^57] He does
not contextualize the protest by referring to what it was about, the
“cause” for which the protesters were rallying support.[^58] Miranda
instead stresses his disappointment with the imagery and narratives that
emerged. Without illustrating what he found troubling, followers are
left to choose whether they will research the media coverage. Miranda’s
tweet underscores his support of peaceful protests but does not
articulate a shared ideological vision with protestors. Indeed, the
third-person language of the tweet, referencing “the people of Puerto
Rico” and “their treatment,” distances Miranda from the island’s
population rather than his claiming them as community. There is no “we”
imagined in Miranda’s response to this contentious political struggle
over economic restructuring after Hurricane Maria.

**{AU: There is no reference to *NYTimes* or link that I can see…**
**EMS: In the screenshot I took of the tweet, you can see that after
Miranda’s text, there is an image included which is derived from the
NYtimes and includes the caption I’m citing. Perhaps this archived
version of the tweet is better?
http://web.archive.org/web/20180901232440/https:/twitter.com/lin\_manuel/status/991782264659939328}**

**ALEX: I see no *NY Times* image and caption as she describes** **in
either her archived tweet**
**(https://web.archive.org/web/20181231191105/https://twitter.com/lin\_manuel/status/991782264659939328)
or the alternate** **she gives above. But I’m not a Twitter user, so am
I just missing something? Or is my crappy satellite internet just not
downloading it? Please take a look at** **her link. If it’s not clear
that the image is from the *NY Times* and the caption she quotes from is
not visible, then I would suggest we stick with my edit above. However,
if it’s there and** **I’m just somehow not seeing what she describes,
please delete my edit and restore her text. **

Miranda appears to generally distance himself from Puerto Rican protest
movements about the governance and economy of Puerto Rico, for example,
he also made no comment on similar protests in 2017 (although he was
also offline then, on a Twitter vacation). Perhaps it is too risky to
invest the intimate ties that Miranda has established with his Twitter
followers in public demonstrations that potentially include contentious
clashes between police and protesters. At the same time, an aesthetics
that is so dependent on a feel-good dynamic of gratitude to support the
exchange of financial capital cannot dwell for too long on activism that
challenges the logic of a debt economy.

Expanding Our Archival Vision
-----------------------------

The limited temporality of Twitter’s window into contemporary discourse
presents specific challenges to researchers who aim to identify trends
by taking a long(er) view of the conversations. There are limited
avenues available to retroactively pull an archive of tweets. The free
programs available (Twitter Archiver and TAGS) only start collecting
tweets after you first run them. In “Twitter’s and @douenislands’
Ambiguous Paths,” Jeannine Murray-Román notes of tweets, “They are
inaccessible to the lay user once they have been displaced by new
tweets. Otherwise, commercial social media monitoring tools…exist
specifically to allow companies to store and dredge information from
users’ tweets that are no longer viewable by the general public.”[^59]
The expense of these commercial tools can be prohibitive for most
scholars.

In addition, Twitter as a corporation sets legal limits on data
collection. In “Studying and Preserving the Global Networks of Twitter
Literature,” Christian Howard explains that “while anyone may
theoretically collect Twitter data, Twitter’s Developer Agreement and
Policy outlines strict limitations about how this data may be shared and
stored.”[^60] Indeed, to access Twitter APIs (application programming
interfaces), scholars need to apply to Twitter for permission to perform
research.[^61] Applying for a developer account does not guarantee
approval, and the circumstances under which an application is denied are
not transparent. I can attest to this because my application was
rejected, and there is no mechanism available to appeal such a decision.
Twitter’s seemingly automated rejection e-mail ironically evokes
Miranda’s aesthetics by attempting to offset the presumed disappointment
of receiving a rejection with repeated gestures of gratitude: “Your
Twitter developer account application was not approved. Thank you for
your interest in developer access. We are unable to serve your use case
at this time. Thank you for your interest in building on Twitter.”[^62]

The social media and Web archiving project Documenting the Now offers a
crowdsourced alternative to such corporate gatekeeping.[^63] As Howard
notes in her essay, researchers “circumvent” the limits set by Twitter
by sharing tweet IDs, since “up to 1,500,000 of which may be shared per
user per month.”[^64] Howard provides a helpful overview of the process:

&gt;Tweet IDs are unique identifying numbers associated with each tweet
that encodes the Tweet’s metadata. The metadata can then be obtained by
running the Tweet IDs through a program or script such as the tweet
‘hydrator’ tool developed by Documenting the Now.[^65]

Even this workaround has its limitations: “Tweet IDs from deleted tweets
are unable to be hydrated, so unless someone else has captured and
stored the data from those accounts, the deleted data is gone.” The
other obstacle is that Twitter places a temporal limit on such archives,
“specif\[ying\] that no entity may store and analyze Tweets ‘for a
period exceeding 30 days.”[^66] While Twitter makes some exceptions to
this storage rule, allowing for academic researchers to collect and
retain tweets for longer periods of time, again, researchers’ status
must be “verified” by Twitter, and the terms of that authorization are
nebulous at best.

The problem posed by these restrictions and the limited alternatives
available for archiving tweets and their metadata is compounded by the
fact that the Library of Congress has stopped archiving the entirety of
Twitter and on 1 January 2018 began “acquir\[ing\] tweets…on a very
selective basis.” The Library of Congress possesses an archive spanning
2006 to 2017; however, it remains inaccessible or “embargoed” for an
indeterminate amount of time.[^67] The disconnect with which I opened
this essay remains: between the private world of social media and the
public space of the library, between the tweet and the book as objects
of literary analysis.

Even if Twitter made their collection of tweets open-access or the
Library of Congress had the ability and means to document it all, why
would academics want to engage an archive so compromised by the dynamics
of surveillance and profit extraction? As a popular culture icon,
Miranda’s mainstream popularity will surely translate into continued
academic attention, with critics researching, historicizing, and
analyzing his creative production and career on stage, in film, and
online. The question remains whether the same critical interest will be
dedicated to other Latinx cultural producers and their use of social
media and to what extent such research will ethically engage those
producers. Twitter will one day surely go the way of MySpace and other
defunct social networking sites; what will be lost is more than a decade
of discursive networks developed by minor US Latinx literary voices with
varied and potentially contradictory articulations. Despite my
ambivalence about the form and content of Twitter, I believe the study
of US Latinx literature and culture will be at a loss if it does not
draw its attention toward ethically analyzing the work of US Latinx
writers on social media before those interfaces disappear and are
replaced by new sites of public discourse.

The absence of a publicly accessible archive moving forward presents
serious challenges to US Latinx studies scholars: How will the Twitter
production of Latinx cultural producers be collected and preserved?
Which tweets by Latinx creative writers will be acquired by the Library
of Congress? Archival work within Latinx literary studies thus far
concentrates on recuperating and circulating pre-1960s literature, most
notably through the groundbreaking work of Arte Público Press and the
Recovering the US Hispanic Literary Heritage project at the University
of Houston. In 2017, the Andrew W. Mellon Foundation awarded the
university a grant to develop the first US digital humanities center for
Latina/o studies, which could indicate future academic investment in
collecting and protecting the social media activity of US Latinx
creative writers. However, the scope of this project currently remains
limited to recovering a pre-1960s past, with the fellowship funds
focused on supporting “several digital humanities projects involving
work by Latinas and Latinos from the American colonial period through
1960.”[^68]

Without governmental or academic sites for archiving tweets, there is no
alternative contextualization possible for their production. While
shifting tweets from the Twitter platform to these alternative spaces
for research would not necessarily resolve the ethical quandaries of
analyzing cultural production produced within a surveillance capitalist
structure, such an archival process would hopefully create some healthy
distance between researcher and corporation. At the same time, future
archivists and researchers of Twitter production must continually
reflect on how their work differs (or does not) from that of the
surveillance capitalists, who do not just “host content but
aggressively, secretly, unilaterally extract value from that
content.”[^69] Perhaps *secret* is the key word that can distinguish our
academic approach to social media labor and creativity. We must not only
be transparent about our methodology but also explicit about our ethical
failures. I can only hope that here I have begun to map out a form and
process that gestures toward this intellectual transparency.

Acknowledgments
---------------

I am indebted to the expertise of Emily Sherwood, who served as the
assistant director of digital pedagogy and scholarship at Bucknell
University in 2017 and trained me to use TAGS, Twitter Archiver, and
Voyant. I am also grateful to Diane Jakacki, Todd Suomela, and Christian
Howard, who provided support for this project at its later stages. I
want to thank my colleagues who provided invaluable feedback on various
drafts: Jeannine Murray-Román, Bill Orchard, Inmaculada Lara-Bonilla,
Marci R. McMahon, Dennis Sloan, Lilianne Lugo-Herrera, and Marcos
Steuernagel. A final thank you to all the scholars who engaged my
presentations on this research at the Latina/o Studies Association,
Latin American Studies Association, American Comparative Literature
Association, CUNY Colloquium for the Study of Latina/o/x Culture and
Theory, Modern Language Association, and American Society for Theater
Research conferences.

Author Bio
----------

Elena Machado Sáez is a professor of English at Bucknell University. She
is the author of *Market Aesthetics: The Purchase of the Past in
Caribbean Diasporic Fiction* (University of Virginia Press, 2015) and a
coauthor of *The Latino/a Canon and the Emergence of Post-Sixties
Literature* (Palgrave Macmillan, 2007). She recently published “Blackout
on Broadway: Affiliation and Audience in *In the
Heights* and *Hamilton*” in a special issue of *Studies in Musical
Theater* (2018). Her essay “Generation MFA: Neoliberalism and the
Shifting Cultural Capital of US Latinx Writers” appears in the
journal *Latino Studies *(2018), and her chapter “Bodega Sold Dreams:
Middle-Class Panic and the Crossover Aesthetics of *In the Heights*”
appears in *Dialectical Imaginaries: Materialist Approaches to US
Latino/a Literature in the Age of Neoliberalism* (University of Michigan
Press, 2018).

APPENDIX?

{Perhaps this could be where the corpus of Miranda tweets from
http://elenamachado.blogs.bucknell.edu/work-in-progress/latinx-twitter-lin-manuel-miranda/
is incorporated? I’ve inserted the corpus using html formatting, but I
defer to whatever formatting works best}

&lt;hr /&gt;

&lt;header class="entry-header"&gt;

&lt;h3 class="entry-title"&gt;"For You" Tweets from March 2017 until
January 2018&lt;/h3&gt;

&lt;/header&gt;

&lt;hr /&gt;

Date: 3/1/2017, Time: 0:28:37. Tweet ID: 836855683870048257

Tweet URL: &lt;a
href="//twitter.com/lin\_manuel/status/836855683870048257"&gt;
https:/twitter.com/lin\_manuel/status/836855683870048257&lt;/a&gt;

Location: London. Adjust accordingly.

&lt;strong&gt;Message:&lt;/strong&gt; Oh, I'll type it up for you later.
&lt;a href="https://t.co/jJj17h9Ima"&gt;https:/t.co/jJj17h9Ima&lt;/a&gt;

Bio:&lt;em&gt; turn off the notifications. seriously. it's a lot, the
whole thing. I love you.&lt;/em&gt;

Followers: 1321719; Follows: 2101

Retweet Count: 165; Favorite Count: 3053

&lt;hr /&gt;

Date: 4/13/2017, Time: 6:58:25. Tweet ID: 852521359125204992

Tweet URL: &lt;a
href="//twitter.com/lin\_manuel/status/852521359125204992”"&gt;
https:/twitter.com/lin\_manuel/status/852521359125204992&lt;/a&gt;

Location: London. Adjust accordingly.

&lt;strong&gt;Message:&lt;/strong&gt; &lt;a
href="https://twitter.com/catmarielive?lang=en"&gt;@CatMarieLive&lt;/a&gt;
I'm putting my resume in now, since I know I'll be working

for you someday. &lt;a
href="https://emojipedia.org/smiling-face-with-sunglasses/"&gt;Smiling
Face With Sunglasses Emoji&lt;/a&gt; Congrats on schools and extend my
congrats to your cast. &lt;a
href="https://t.co/VX40cfFnkt"&gt;https:/t.co/VX40cfFnkt&lt;/a&gt;

Bio:&lt;em&gt; turn off the notifications. seriously. it's a lot, the
whole thing. I love you.&lt;/em&gt;

Followers: 1384157; Follows: 2158

Retweet Count: 16; Favorite Count: 220

&lt;hr /&gt;

Date: 5/3/2017, Time: 12:09:25. Tweet ID: 859658638629232640

Tweet URL: &lt;a
href="https://twitter.com/lin\_manuel/status/859658638629232640"&gt;https:/twitter.com/lin\_manuel/status/859658638629232640&lt;/a&gt;

Location: London. LONDONNNNNNNNNNNN

&lt;strong&gt;Message:&lt;/strong&gt; Gmorning! Take the time to tell
someone you're grateful for them. Mean it. It feels good. Try it.
Grateful for you, &amp; another day. Let's go!

Bio:&lt;em&gt; I work my inspiration til I find a spark of life in it I
draw on it I siphon it I earn my multi hyphenate&lt;/em&gt;

Followers: 1413291; Follows: 2186

Retweet Count: 5130; Favorite Count: 15774

&lt;hr /&gt;

Date: 5/3/2017, Time: 18:56:05. Tweet ID: 859760977776082948

Tweet URL: &lt;a
href="//twitter.com/lin\_manuel/status/859760977776082948”"&gt;https:/twitter.com/lin\_manuel/status/859760977776082948&lt;/a&gt;

Location: London. LONDONNNNNNNNNNNN

&lt;strong&gt;Message:&lt;/strong&gt; In looking for those lyrics for
you, I found a poem I wrote in 9th grade. Oof. It is oof. Being 15 is
just nonstop oof.

Bio:&lt;em&gt; I work my inspiration til I find a spark of life in it I
draw on it I siphon it I earn my multi-hyphenate&lt;/em&gt;

Followers: 1413291; Follows: 2186

Retweet Count: 656; Favorite Count: 7663

&lt;hr /&gt;

Date: 5/4/2017, Time: 2:39:20. Tweet ID: 859877558682255361

Tweet URL: &lt;a
href="https://twitter.com/lin\_manuel/status/859877558682255361"&gt;https://twitter.com/lin\_manuel/status/859877558682255361&lt;/a&gt;

Location: London. LONDONNNNNNNNNNNN

&lt;strong&gt;Message:&lt;/strong&gt; Gnight! Grateful for you, &amp;
another day.

Bio:&lt;em&gt; I work my inspiration til I find a spark of life in it I
draw on it I siphon it I earn my multi-hyphenate&lt;/em&gt;

Followers: 1413291; Follows: 2186

Retweet Count: 962; Favorite Count: 6669

&lt;hr /&gt;

Date: 5/4/2017, Time: 18:07:04. Tweet ID: 860111032110415872

Tweet URL: &lt;a
href="//twitter.com/lin\_manuel/status/860111032110415872”"&gt;
https:/twitter.com/lin\_manuel/status/860111032110415872&lt;/a&gt;

Location: London. LONDONNNNNNNNNNNN

&lt;strong&gt;Message&lt;/strong&gt;: Deleted the last tweet. You hurt
my handwriting's feelings. No more handwritten drafts for you.

Bio:&lt;em&gt; I work my inspiration til I find a spark of life in it I
draw on it I siphon it I earn my multi-hyphenate&lt;/em&gt;

Followers: 1413291; Follows: 2186

Retweet Count: 367; Favorite Count: 5794

&lt;hr /&gt;

Date: 5/8/2017, Time: 16:28:51. Tweet ID: 861543416563412992

Tweet URL: &lt;a
href="https://twitter.com/lin\_manuel/status/861543416563412992"&gt;https:/twitter.com/lin\_manuel/status/861543416563412992&lt;/a&gt;

Location: London. LONDONNNNNNNNNNNN

&lt;strong&gt;Message:&lt;/strong&gt; Been working on a long mix for you
later today but here's an amuse

bouche to tide you over in the meanTime: … &lt;a
href="https://t.co/5CFyAyxRam"&gt;https://t.co/5CFyAyxRam&lt;/a&gt;

Bio:&lt;em&gt; I work my inspiration til I find a spark of life in it I
draw on it I siphon it I earn my multi-hyphenate&lt;/em&gt;

Followers: 1412526; Follows: 2186

Retweet Count: 527; Favorite Count: 4012

&lt;hr /&gt;

Date: 5/15/2017, Time: 19:07:38. Tweet ID: 864112541294895105

Tweet URL: &lt;a
href="//twitter.com/lin\_manuel/status/864112541294895105”"&gt;
https:/twitter.com/lin\_manuel/status/864112541294895105&lt;/a&gt;

Location: London. LONDONNNNNNNNNNNN

&lt;strong&gt;Message&lt;/strong&gt;: &lt;a
href="https://twitter.com/BlackGirlNerds"&gt;@BlackGirlNerds&lt;/a&gt;
As ever, here's the songs on the playlist for your various needs. &lt;a
href="https://t.co/GhSlO1bsui"&gt;https://t.co/GhSlO1bsui&lt;/a&gt;

Bio:&lt;em&gt; I work my inspiration til I find a spark of life in it I
draw on it I siphon it I earn my multi-hyphenate&lt;/em&gt;

Followers: 1418322; Follows: 2193

Retweet Count: 40; Favorite Count: 388

&lt;hr /&gt;

Date: 5/19/2017, Time: 9:03:00. Tweet ID: 865598673278906368

Tweet URL: &lt;a
href="https://twitter.com/Lin\_Manuel/status/865598673278906368"&gt;https://twitter.com/Lin\_Manuel/status/865598673278906368&lt;/a&gt;

Location: London. LONDONNNNNNNNNNNN

Message: Grateful for you. Can't wait for you to see it this summer.

&lt;a
href="https://t.co/nCiYWU99KH"&gt;https://t.co/nCiYWU99KH&lt;/a&gt;

Bio:&lt;em&gt; turn off the notifications&lt;/em&gt;

Followers: 1422571; Follows: 2205

Retweet Count: 30; Favorite Count: 199

&lt;hr /&gt;

Date: 5/22/2017, Time: 3:50:18. Tweet ID: 866607141897076736

Tweet URL: &lt;a
href="https://twitter.com/Lin\_Manuel/status/866607141897076736"&gt;https://twitter.com/Lin\_Manuel/status/866607141897076736&lt;/a&gt;

Location: London. LONDONNNNNNNNNNNN

Message: As ever, here's the playlist in order for your various needs.
Please

enjoy. In order. &lt;a
href="https://t.co/sp468VQOa1"&gt;https://t.co/sp468VQOa1&lt;/a&gt;

Bio:&lt;em&gt; turn off the notifications&lt;/em&gt;

Followers: 1424272; Follows: 2208

Retweet Count: 69; Favorite Count: 460

Reply to: Lin\_Manuel

&lt;hr /&gt;

Date: 5/25/2017, Time: 23:51:35. Tweet ID: 867634232801333248

Tweet URL: &lt;a
href="https://twitter.com/Lin\_Manuel/status/867634232801333248"&gt;https://twitter.com/Lin\_Manuel/status/867634232801333248&lt;/a&gt;

Location: London. LONDONNNNNNNNNNNN

Message: Got nothing smart for you today. Here's some smart things I
said before.

&lt;a
href="https://t.co/ARn0hA4ije"&gt;https://t.co/ARn0hA4ije&lt;/a&gt; and
here. &lt;a
href="https://t.co/KFLrwVLJ58"&gt;https://t.co/KFLrwVLJ58&lt;/a&gt;

Bio:&lt;em&gt; turn off the notifications&lt;/em&gt;

Followers: 1429172; Follows: 2214

Retweet Count: 51; Favorite Count: 283

&lt;hr /&gt;

Date: 5/30/2017, Time: 3:31:56. Tweet ID: 869501624229801984

Tweet URL: &lt;a
href="https://twitter.com/Lin\_Manuel/status/869501624229801984"&gt;https://twitter.com/Lin\_Manuel/status/869501624229801984&lt;/a&gt;

Location: London. LONDONNNNNNNNNNNN

Message: As ever, here's the tunes for your perusal. Make it on your
listening

service of choice. Listen in order por favor: &lt;a
href="https://t.co/zChrAtwf3l"&gt;https://t.co/zChrAtwf3l&lt;/a&gt;

Bio:&lt;em&gt; turn off the notifications. yay hamlet.&lt;/em&gt;

Followers: 1433980; Follows: 2227

Retweet Count: 24; Favorite Count: 180

&lt;hr /&gt;

Date: 5/30/2017, Time: 6:48:43. Tweet ID: 869551146708369408

Tweet URL: &lt;a
href="https://twitter.com/Lin\_Manuel/status/869551146708369408"&gt;https://twitter.com/Lin\_Manuel/status/869551146708369408&lt;/a&gt;

Location: London. LONDONNNNNNNNNNNN

Message: Oh I have another present for you! 21 Chump Street, the 14
minute

musical I wrote for &lt;a
href="https://twitter.com/ThisAmerLife"&gt;@ThisAmerLife&lt;/a&gt;, now
on Spotify! &lt;a
href="https://t.co/s59bBKYyXZ"&gt;https://t.co/s59bBKYyXZ&lt;/a&gt;

Bio:&lt;em&gt; turn off the notifications. yay hamlet.&lt;/em&gt;

Followers: 1434181; Follows: 2226

Retweet Count: 291; Favorite Count: 1155

&lt;hr /&gt;

Date: 6/1/2017, Time: 15:43:00. Tweet ID: 870410600463126529

Tweet URL: &lt;a
href="https://twitter.com/Lin\_Manuel/status/870410600463126529"&gt;https://twitter.com/Lin\_Manuel/status/870410600463126529&lt;/a&gt;

Location: London. LONDONNNNNNNNNNNN

Message: Good night! Cheering for you from the rafters! &lt;a
href="https://t.co/rK64qLKSpB"&gt;

https://t.co/rK64qLKSpB&lt;/a&gt;

Bio:&lt;em&gt; turn off the notifications. yay hamlet.&lt;/em&gt;

Followers: 1437888; Follows: 2227

Retweet Count: 133; Favorite Count: 902

&lt;hr /&gt;

Date: 6/1/2017, Time: 22:57:00. Tweet ID: 870172440953008128

Tweet URL: &lt;a
href="https://twitter.com/Lin\_Manuel/status/870172440953008128"&gt;https://twitter.com/Lin\_Manuel/status/870172440953008128&lt;/a&gt;

Location: London. LONDONNNNNNNNNNNN

Message: Good morning! Cheering for you from the rafters! &lt;a
href="https://t.co/oBMbrmVhTH"&gt;https://t.co/oBMbrmVhTH&lt;/a&gt;

Bio:&lt;em&gt; turn off the notifications. yay hamlet.&lt;/em&gt;

Followers: 1437342; Follows: 2227

Retweet Count: 96; Favorite Count: 492

&lt;hr /&gt;

Date: 6/7/2017, Time: 9:16:00. Tweet ID: 872487439318880257

Tweet URL: &lt;a
href="https://twitter.com/Lin\_Manuel/status/872487439318880257"&gt;https://twitter.com/Lin\_Manuel/status/872487439318880257&lt;/a&gt;

Location: London. LONDONNNNNNNNNNNN

Message: Here, see for yourself! &lt;a
href="https://twitter.com/hashtag/marypoppinsreturns"&gt;\#MaryPoppinsReturns&lt;/a&gt;

&lt;a
href="https://t.co/1h0TyzNDBR"&gt;https://t.co/1h0TyzNDBR&lt;/a&gt;

Bio:&lt;em&gt; turn off the notifications. yay hamlet.&lt;/em&gt;

Followers: 1442323; Follows: 2236

Retweet Count: 99; Favorite Count: 461

&lt;hr /&gt;

Date: 6/12/2017, Time: 6:03:00. Tweet ID: 874250737408192514

Tweet URL: &lt;a
href="https://twitter.com/Lin\_Manuel/status/874250737408192514"&gt;https://twitter.com/Lin\_Manuel/status/874250737408192514&lt;/a&gt;

Location: NYC

Message: Good morning! Woke up grateful for you, and this lady, and that
guy, and

everything

Bio:&lt;em&gt; There's a breeze off the Hudson...&lt;/em&gt;

Followers: 1449121; Follows: 2243

Retweet Count: 66; Favorite Count: 213

&lt;hr /&gt;

Date: 6/12/2017, Time: 18:39:40. Tweet ID: 874441105978400768

Tweet URL: &lt;a
href="https://twitter.com/Lin\_Manuel/status/874441105978400768"&gt;https://twitter.com/Lin\_Manuel/status/874441105978400768&lt;/a&gt;

Location: NYC

Message: Good night! Woke up grateful for you, and this lady, and that
guy, and

everything

Bio:&lt;em&gt; There's a breeze off the Hudson...&lt;/em&gt;

Followers: 1451074; Follows: 2244

Retweet Count: 278; Favorite Count: 1785

&lt;hr /&gt;

Date: 6/21/2017, Time: 15:23:48. Tweet ID: 877532510099341312

Tweet URL: &lt;a
href="https://twitter.com/Lin\_Manuel/status/877532510099341312"&gt;https://twitter.com/Lin\_Manuel/status/877532510099341312&lt;/a&gt;

Location: NYC

Message: Gmorning! Write a bit, just for yourself. Give that maelstrom
in your

head a place to land. Lookit everything swirling around in there!

Bio:&lt;em&gt; There's a breeze off the Hudson...&lt;/em&gt;

Followers: 1464256; Follows: 2259

Retweet Count: 534; Favorite Count: 1759

&lt;hr /&gt;

Date: 6/22/2017, Time: 22:53:34. Tweet ID: 877736294964641792

Tweet URL: &lt;a
href="https://twitter.com/Lin\_Manuel/status/877736294964641792"&gt;https://twitter.com/Lin\_Manuel/status/877736294964641792&lt;/a&gt;

Location: ?

Message: Write some thoughts down for yourself. Grab what you can, pin
it to the

page. Look at that! How long you been hanging on to those? Gnight!

Bio:&lt;em&gt; what just happened&lt;/em&gt;

Followers: 1465033; Follows: 2259

Retweet Count: 589; Favorite Count: 2276

&lt;hr /&gt;

Date: 6/27/2017, Time: 19:19:55. Tweet ID: 879524664283987968

Tweet URL: &lt;a
href="https://twitter.com/Lin\_Manuel/status/879524664283987968"&gt;https://twitter.com/Lin\_Manuel/status/879524664283987968&lt;/a&gt;

Location: Troy's bucket

Message: What a day. Thanks to you all for your incredible embrace of
&lt;a
href="https://twitter.com/hashtag/ham4all?lang=en"&gt;\#Ham4All&lt;/a&gt;.

More surprises later this week. \*Chance voice\* I&lt;a
href="https://emojipedia.org/heavy-black-heart/"&gt;Heavy red
heartemoji&lt;/a&gt;yousomuch

Bio:&lt;em&gt; it's our time down here&lt;/em&gt;

Followers: 1473976; Follows: 2268

Retweet Count: 312; Favorite Count: 5281

&lt;hr /&gt;

Date: 6/30/2017, Time: 6:23:56. Tweet ID: 880778935029596160

Tweet URL: &lt;a
href="https://twitter.com/Lin\_Manuel/status/880778935029596160"&gt;https://twitter.com/Lin\_Manuel/status/880778935029596160&lt;/a&gt;

Location: Troy's bucket

Message: It's been a minute since we had a digital ham4ham...and I have
one more

surprise for you this week...

Bio:&lt;em&gt; it's our time down here&lt;/em&gt;

Followers: 1481900; Follows: 2274

Retweet Count: 98; Favorite Count: 1137

&lt;hr /&gt;

Date: 6/30/2017, Time: 6:32:28. Tweet ID: 879693916773154816

Tweet URL: &lt;a
href="https://twitter.com/Lin\_Manuel/status/879693916773154816"&gt;https://twitter.com/Lin\_Manuel/status/879693916773154816&lt;/a&gt;

Location: Troy's bucket

Message: &lt;a href="https://twitter.com/Avionn2"&gt;@Avionn2&lt;/a&gt;
&lt;a
href="https://twitter.com/griffinmcelroy"&gt;@griffinmcelroy&lt;/a&gt;
&lt;a
href="https://twitter.com/JustinMcElroy"&gt;@JustinMcElroy&lt;/a&gt; My
ep is up on the dark webs but the vid is not suitable for younger
viewers

Bio:&lt;em&gt; it's our time down here&lt;/em&gt;

Followers: 1474476; Follows: 2268

Retweet Count: 0; Favorite Count: 2

Reply to: Avionn2

&lt;hr /&gt;

Date: 6/30/2017, Time: 8:32:34. Tweet ID: 880811304570806272

Tweet URL: &lt;a
href="https://twitter.com/Lin\_Manuel/status/880811304570806272"&gt;https://twitter.com/Lin\_Manuel/status/880811304570806272&lt;/a&gt;

Location: Troy's bucket

Message: I swear I'd give my life for youuuuuu &lt;a
href="https://twitter.com/hashtag/ham4all?lang=en"&gt;\#Ham4All&lt;/a&gt;
Thank you! &lt;a
href="https://t.co/KGqfYUjkYR"&gt;https://t.co/KGqfYUjkYR&lt;/a&gt;

Bio:&lt;em&gt; it's our time down here&lt;/em&gt;

Followers: 1482093; Follows: 2275

Retweet Count: 29; Favorite Count: 239

&lt;hr /&gt;

Date: 6/30/2017, Time: 13:07:25. Tweet ID: 880880474876510208

Tweet URL: &lt;a
href="https://twitter.com/Lin\_Manuel/status/880880474876510208"&gt;https://twitter.com/Lin\_Manuel/status/880880474876510208&lt;/a&gt;

Location: Troy's bucket

Message: 1) Okay! So you've got the &lt;a
href="https://twitter.com/hashtag/ham4all?lang=en"&gt;\#ham4all&lt;/a&gt;,
you've got the Immigrants video,

and the instrumentals! We've spent months planning this week for you.

Bio:&lt;em&gt; it's our time down here&lt;/em&gt;

Followers: 1482468; Follows: 2276

Retweet Count: 145; Favorite Count: 1617

&lt;hr /&gt;

Date: 8/14/2017, Time: 5:14:32. Tweet ID: 897068921857220608

Tweet URL: &lt;a
href="https://twitter.com/Lin\_Manuel/status/897068921857220608"&gt;https://twitter.com/Lin\_Manuel/status/897068921857220608&lt;/a&gt;

Location: Off the gourd

Message: I'll have a new Spotify mix for you by end of day. Any other
questions?

&lt;a
href="https://t.co/8HMPMMseRd"&gt;https://t.co/8HMPMMseRd&lt;/a&gt;

Bio:&lt;em&gt; Almost home&lt;/em&gt;

Followers: 1536105; Follows: 2280

Retweet Count: 31; Favorite Count: 501

&lt;hr /&gt;

Date: 8/14/2017, Time: 8:58:57. Tweet ID: 897125398177337345

Tweet URL: &lt;a
href="https://twitter.com/Lin\_Manuel/status/897125398177337345"&gt;https://twitter.com/Lin\_Manuel/status/897125398177337345&lt;/a&gt;

Location: Your occipital lobe

Message: I knew you would, Gigi. That's why I wore my Evan Hansen finery
for you.

&lt;a
href="https://t.co/lnR6EKpkhr"&gt;https://t.co/lnR6EKpkhr&lt;/a&gt;

Bio:&lt;em&gt; you will rue the day you kissed a writer in the dark
-Lorde&lt;/em&gt;

Followers: 1536498; Follows: 2280

Retweet Count: 135; Favorite Count: 1369

&lt;hr /&gt;

Date: 8/16/2017, Time: 7:49:28. Tweet ID: 897832689717305347

Tweet URL: &lt;a
href="https://twitter.com/Lin\_Manuel/status/897832689717305347"&gt;https://twitter.com/Lin\_Manuel/status/897832689717305347&lt;/a&gt;

Location: Your hospitable robe

Message: Gmorning early risers I got love for you &lt;a
href="https://t.co/z5b1xLQo9L"&gt;https://t.co/z5b1xLQo9L&lt;/a&gt;

Bio:&lt;em&gt; every day I worry all day&lt;/em&gt;

Followers: 1542955; Follows: 2283

Retweet Count: 178; Favorite Count: 2048

&lt;hr /&gt;

Date: 8/17/2017, Time: 11:44:52. Tweet ID: 898254316758159360

Tweet URL: &lt;a
href="https://twitter.com/Lin\_Manuel/status/898254316758159360"&gt;https://twitter.com/Lin\_Manuel/status/898254316758159360&lt;/a&gt;

Location: Your hospitable robe

Message: My mom, to Roukin of &lt;a
href="https://twitter.com/turnamc?lang=en"&gt;@TurnAMC&lt;/a&gt;: ""OH
YOU ARE SO BAD! I KEPT WAITING FOR YOU TO DIE!"" &lt;a
href="https://t.co/ytAc8ijZGL"&gt;https://t.co/ytAc8ijZGL&lt;/a&gt;

Bio:&lt;em&gt; every day I worry all day&lt;/em&gt;

Followers: 1548585; Follows: 2284

Retweet Count: 73; Favorite Count: 796

&lt;hr /&gt;

Date: 8/22/2017, Time: 12:07:38. Tweet ID: 900071985664978945

Tweet URL: &lt;a
href="https://twitter.com/Lin\_Manuel/status/900071985664978945"&gt;https://twitter.com/Lin\_Manuel/status/900071985664978945&lt;/a&gt;

Message: Here's the playlist for your Maxell cassettes... &lt;a
href="https://t.co/iSOEYpHrKo"&gt;https://t.co/iSOEYpHrKo&lt;/a&gt;

Bio:&lt;em&gt; it can't rain all the time&lt;/em&gt;

Followers: 1563856; Follows: 2291

Retweet Count: 95; Favorite Count: 871

Reply to: Lin\_Manuel

&lt;hr /&gt;

Date: 8/25/2017, Time: 7:58:02. Tweet ID: 901096336862449669

Tweet URL: &lt;a
href="https://twitter.com/Lin\_Manuel/status/901096336862449669"&gt;https://twitter.com/Lin\_Manuel/status/901096336862449669&lt;/a&gt;

Message: Texas, we are thinking about you and we love you and we're here
for you.

Be safe. \[&lt;a
href="https://emojipedia.org/heavy-black-heart/"&gt;Heavy red heart
emoji&lt;/a&gt;\] \[&lt;a
href="https://emojipedia.org/heavy-black-heart/"&gt;Heavy red heart
emoji&lt;/a&gt;\] \[&lt;a
href="https://emojipedia.org/heavy-black-heart/"&gt;Heavy red heart
emoji&lt;/a&gt;\] \[&lt;a
href="https://emojipedia.org/heavy-black-heart/"&gt;Heavy red heart
emoji&lt;/a&gt;\] \[&lt;a
href="https://emojipedia.org/heavy-black-heart/"&gt;Heavy red heart
emoji&lt;/a&gt;\]

Bio:&lt;em&gt; O Mai Ga&lt;/em&gt;

Followers: 1573351; Follows: 2293

Retweet Count: 276; Favorite Count: 1208

&lt;hr /&gt;

Date: 8/28/2017, Time: 7:04:43. Tweet ID: 902170081827975169

Tweet URL: &lt;a
href="https://twitter.com/Lin\_Manuel/status/902170081827975169"&gt;https://twitter.com/Lin\_Manuel/status/902170081827975169&lt;/a&gt;

Message: Thank YOU for your insane talent and an incredible performance,
Tony!

&lt;a
href="https://t.co/jLbWXVj51C"&gt;https://t.co/jLbWXVj51C&lt;/a&gt;

Bio:&lt;em&gt; closed on weekends&lt;/em&gt;

Followers: 1581826; Follows: 2298

Retweet Count: 40; Favorite Count: 634

&lt;hr /&gt;

Date: 8/29/2017, Time: 3:03:16; Tweet ID: 902652898156449799

Tweet URL: &lt;a
href="https://twitter.com/Lin\_Manuel/status/902652898156449799"&gt;https://twitter.com/Lin\_Manuel/status/902652898156449799&lt;/a&gt;

Message: Here's the playlist for your Discmans. Enjoy! &lt;a
href="https://t.co/CN2B6tD62P"&gt;https://t.co/CN2B6tD62P&lt;/a&gt;

Bio:&lt;em&gt; closed on weekends&lt;/em&gt;

Followers: 1585895; Follows: 2305

Retweet Count: 18; Favorite Count: 154

Reply to: Lin\_Manuel

&lt;hr /&gt;

Date: 9/5/2017, Time: 2:01:00. Tweet ID: 905174008307601408

Tweet URL: &lt;a
href="https://twitter.com/Lin\_Manuel/status/905174008307601408"&gt;https://twitter.com/Lin\_Manuel/status/905174008307601408&lt;/a&gt;

Message: Islands of the Caribe, stay safe. Your children all over the
world are

praying for you. &lt;a
href="https://twitter.com/hashtag/irma"&gt;\#Irma&lt;/a&gt;

Bio:&lt;em&gt; no matter how hot the block has gotten i've never
forgotten where I'm

from&lt;/em&gt;

Followers: 1604921; Follows: 2319

Retweet Count: 194; Favorite Count: 747

&lt;hr /&gt;

Date: 9/8/2017, Time: 8:26:00. Tweet ID: 906176961998979072

Tweet URL: &lt;a
href="https://twitter.com/Lin\_Manuel/status/906176961998979072"&gt;https://twitter.com/Lin\_Manuel/status/906176961998979072&lt;/a&gt;

Message: Dreamers, this is news for you. What is not news but also true:
millions

of Americans have your back and are fighting for you. \[Kamala Harris
Tweet\]

&lt;a
href="https://t.co/7sG0GH4YrV"&gt;https://t.co/7sG0GH4YrV&lt;/a&gt;

Bio:&lt;em&gt; no matter how hot the block has gotten i've never
forgotten where I'm

from&lt;/em&gt;

Followers: 1615397; Follows: 2324

Retweet Count: 387; Favorite Count: 948

&lt;hr /&gt;

Date: 9/8/2017; Time: 10:34:00. Tweet ID: 906209220445470724

Tweet URL: &lt;a
href="https://twitter.com/Lin\_Manuel/status/906209220445470724"&gt;https://twitter.com/Lin\_Manuel/status/906209220445470724&lt;/a&gt;

Message: I knew. It's for you. &lt;a
href="https://t.co/4kyK9vANru"&gt;https://t.co/4kyK9vANru&lt;/a&gt;

Bio:&lt;em&gt; no matter how hot the block has gotten i've never
forgotten where I'm

from&lt;/em&gt;

Followers: 1615676; Follows: 2324

Retweet Count: 41; Favorite Count: 588

&lt;hr /&gt;

Date: 9/13/2017, Time: 10:46:53. Tweet ID: 908024198190288896

Tweet URL: &lt;a
href="https://twitter.com/Lin\_Manuel/status/908024198190288896"&gt;https://twitter.com/Lin\_Manuel/status/908024198190288896&lt;/a&gt;

Message: Schuylerville rep! Thanks for your support today! &lt;a
href="https://t.co/Hrhvqoiofp"&gt;https://t.co/Hrhvqoiofp&lt;/a&gt;

Bio:&lt;em&gt; closed weekends/mad open the rest of the time&lt;/em&gt;

Followers: 1629633; Follows: 2329

Retweet Count: 15; Favorite Count: 184

&lt;hr /&gt;

Date: 9/18/2017, Time: 9:23:29. Tweet ID: 909815146440216577

Tweet URL: &lt;a
href="https://twitter.com/Lin\_Manuel/status/909815146440216577"&gt;https://twitter.com/Lin\_Manuel/status/909815146440216577&lt;/a&gt;

Message: Here's the tunes. Listen in order as you make hot cocoa, watch
the

leaves turn and get out the lotion for your knees cuz it's getting
colder &lt;a href="https://t.co/atg7KpwwAw"&gt;

https://t.co/atg7KpwwAw&lt;/a&gt;

Bio:&lt;em&gt; closed weekends/mad open the rest of the time&lt;/em&gt;

Followers: 1642992; Follows: 2337

Retweet Count: 137; Favorite Count: 908

Reply to: Lin\_Manuel

&lt;hr /&gt;

Date: 9/18/2017, Time: 14:41:08. Tweet ID: 909895086061887488

Tweet URL: &lt;a
href="https://twitter.com/Lin\_Manuel/status/909895086061887488"&gt;https://twitter.com/Lin\_Manuel/status/909895086061887488&lt;/a&gt;

Message: &lt;a
href="https://emojipedia.org/flag-for-puerto-rico/"&gt;Flag of Puerto
Rico Emoji&lt;/a&gt;, your children and grandchildren

are out here praying for you. Stay safe. &lt;a
href="https://t.co/LVLelsdjxO"&gt;https://t.co/LVLelsdjxO&lt;/a&gt;

Bio:&lt;em&gt; closed weekends/mad open the rest of the time&lt;/em&gt;

Followers: 1643676; Follows: 2337

Retweet Count: 260; Favorite Count: 1125

&lt;hr /&gt;

Date: 9/21/2017, Time: 12:47:19. Tweet ID: 910953605976424448

Tweet URL: &lt;a
href="https://twitter.com/Lin\_Manuel/status/910953605976424448"&gt;https://twitter.com/Lin\_Manuel/status/910953605976424448&lt;/a&gt;

Message: Thanks in advance for your generosity. Mil gracias.

Bio:&lt;em&gt; closed weekends/mad open the rest of the time&lt;/em&gt;

Followers: 1656441; Follows: 2339

Retweet Count: 28; Favorite Count: 231

Reply to: Lin\_Manuel

&lt;hr /&gt;

Date: 9/22/2017, Time: 7:12:29. Tweet ID: 911231730903855104

Tweet URL: &lt;a
href="https://twitter.com/Lin\_Manuel/status/911231730903855104"&gt;https://twitter.com/Lin\_Manuel/status/911231730903855104&lt;/a&gt;

Message: &lt;a
href="https://twitter.com/LeahLibresco"&gt;@LeahLibresco&lt;/a&gt; A
beautiful piece. I'm profoundly sorry for your loss and

grateful for your writing.

Bio:&lt;em&gt; help ????here: &lt;a
href="https://t.co/fErFdtN98a"&gt;https://t.co/fErFdtN98a&lt;/a&gt;&lt;/em&gt;

Followers: 1658130; Follows: 2339

Retweet Count: 0; Favorite Count: 4

Reply to: LeahLibresco

&lt;hr /&gt;

Date: 9/22/2017, Time: 15:15:04. Tweet ID: 911353178049908736

Tweet URL: &lt;a
href="https://twitter.com/Lin\_Manuel/status/911353178049908736"&gt;https://twitter.com/Lin\_Manuel/status/911353178049908736&lt;/a&gt;

Message: Oh, it's easy! 1. Realize being an actor of color means no one
will

write your dream role for you. 2. Get to writing. 3. Repeat. Good luck!

&lt;a
href="https://t.co/oBEiTfLfRl"&gt;https://t.co/oBEiTfLfRl&lt;/a&gt;

Bio:&lt;em&gt; help ????here: &lt;a
href="https://t.co/fErFdtN98a"&gt;https://t.co/fErFdtN98a&lt;/a&gt;&lt;/em&gt;

Followers: 1659066; Follows: 2339

Retweet Count: 305; Favorite Count: 1325

&lt;hr /&gt;

Date: 9/23/2017, Time: 9:05:54; Tweet ID: 911622662283198464

Tweet URL: &lt;a
href="https://twitter.com/Lin\_Manuel/status/911622662283198464"&gt;https://twitter.com/Lin\_Manuel/status/911622662283198464&lt;/a&gt;

Message: Thank you all for your donations. And thanks to my pops &lt;a
href="https://twitter.com/Vegalteno"&gt;@Vegalteno&lt;/a&gt;, who

has barely slept all week helping make this happen: &lt;a
href="https://t.co/60P9PGf79j"&gt;https://t.co/60P9PGf79j&lt;/a&gt;

Bio:&lt;em&gt; help ????here: &lt;a
href="https://t.co/fErFdtN98a"&gt;https://t.co/fErFdtN98a&lt;/a&gt;&lt;/em&gt;

Followers: 1661200; Follows: 2340

Retweet Count: 136; Favorite Count: 766

&lt;hr /&gt;

Date: 9/25/2017, Time: 2:28:20. Tweet ID: 912247387363725312

Tweet URL: &lt;a
href="https://twitter.com/Lin\_Manuel/status/912247387363725312"&gt;https://twitter.com/Lin\_Manuel/status/912247387363725312&lt;/a&gt;

Message: Yes! (ps &lt;a
href="https://twitter.com/samriegel"&gt;@samriegel&lt;/a&gt; &lt;a
href="https://twitter.com/FrankAngones"&gt;@FrankAngones&lt;/a&gt;
please read the last 15 tweets on my

TL, I've got Season 2 all ready for you. \[Hispanic Federation Donation
website url\]

&lt;a
href="https://t.co/fcsKmu0trL"&gt;https://t.co/fcsKmu0trL&lt;/a&gt;

Bio:&lt;em&gt; help ????here: &lt;a
href="https://t.co/fErFdtN98a"&gt;https://t.co/fErFdtN98a&lt;/a&gt;&lt;/em&gt;

Followers: 1667288; Follows: 2348

Retweet Count: 9; Favorite Count: 83

&lt;hr /&gt;

Date: 9/25/2017, Time: 3:18:37. Tweet ID: 912260041654329344

Tweet URL: &lt;a
href="https://twitter.com/Lin\_Manuel/status/912260041654329344"&gt;https://twitter.com/Lin\_Manuel/status/912260041654329344&lt;/a&gt;

Message: Oh, well I hope your crush says yes to your Hoco Poco and Loco!
Here's a

mixtape for you: &lt;a
href="https://t.co/dVnHUwzgmI"&gt;https://t.co/dVnHUwzgmI&lt;/a&gt;

Bio:&lt;em&gt; help ????here: &lt;a
href="https://t.co/fErFdtN98a"&gt;https://t.co/fErFdtN98a&lt;/a&gt;&lt;/em&gt;

Followers: 1667279; Follows: 2348

Retweet Count: 39; Favorite Count: 332

Reply to: Lin\_Manuel

&lt;hr /&gt;

Date: 9/25/2017, Time: 7:28:58. Tweet ID: 912323044269490184

Tweet URL: &lt;a
href="https://twitter.com/Lin\_Manuel/status/912323044269490184"&gt;https://twitter.com/Lin\_Manuel/status/912323044269490184&lt;/a&gt;

Message: &lt;a
href="https://twitter.com/realDonaldTrump"&gt;@realDonaldTrump&lt;/a&gt;
3.5 Million Americans are waiting for you.

&lt;a
href="https://t.co/z7mmF6THHW"&gt;https://t.co/z7mmF6THHW&lt;/a&gt;

Bio:&lt;em&gt; The Paperon De Paperoni Of Washington Heights. help
????here:

&lt;a
href="https://t.co/fErFdtN98a"&gt;https://t.co/fErFdtN98a&lt;/a&gt;&lt;/em&gt;

Followers: 1667610; Follows: 2347

Retweet Count: 36; Favorite Count: 77

Reply to: realDonaldTrump

&lt;hr /&gt;

Date: 9/30/2017, Time: 5:14:21. Tweet ID: 914101106468376577

Tweet URL: &lt;a
href="https://twitter.com/Lin\_Manuel/status/914101106468376577"&gt;https://twitter.com/Lin\_Manuel/status/914101106468376577&lt;/a&gt;

Message: Gmorning. Put what you got to a greater purpose. Your rage,
your fear,

don't let it fester. Make it work for you. &lt;a
href="https://t.co/pxx7qvHPdf"&gt;https://t.co/pxx7qvHPdf&lt;/a&gt;

Bio:&lt;em&gt; help ????here: &lt;a
href="https://t.co/fErFdtN98a"&gt;https://t.co/fErFdtN98a&lt;/a&gt;&lt;/em&gt;

Followers: 1687497; Follows: 2351

Retweet Count: 209; Favorite Count: 539

&lt;hr /&gt;

Date: 9/30/2017, Time: 5:21:35. Tweet ID: 914102927744217088

Tweet URL: &lt;a
href="https://twitter.com/Lin\_Manuel/status/914102927744217088"&gt;https://twitter.com/Lin\_Manuel/status/914102927744217088&lt;/a&gt;

Message: You're going straight to hell, &lt;a
href="http://twitter.com/realDonaldTrump"&gt;@realDonaldTrump&lt;/a&gt;.
No long lines for you.

Someone will say, ""Right this way, sir."" They'll clear a path. &lt;a
href="https://t.co/ljmumXrvXh"&gt;https://t.co/ljmumXrvXh&lt;/a&gt;

Bio:&lt;em&gt; help ????here: &lt;a
href="https://t.co/fErFdtN98a"&gt;https://t.co/fErFdtN98a&lt;/a&gt;&lt;/em&gt;

Followers: 1689331; Follows: 2351

Retweet Count: 1964; Favorite Count: 4971

&lt;hr /&gt;

Date: 10/1/2017, Time: 8:19:00. Tweet ID: 914509978974801920

Tweet URL: &lt;a
href="https://twitter.com/Lin\_Manuel/status/914509978974801920"&gt;https://twitter.com/Lin\_Manuel/status/914509978974801920&lt;/a&gt;

Message: God bless you &amp; that cutie, Cydnee. Bless all of you who
give your

time &amp; effort for your fellow citizens. \[Hispanic Federation
Donation website url\]

&lt;a
href="https://t.co/zK3gwsSZIt"&gt;https://t.co/zK3gwsSZIt&lt;/a&gt;

Bio:&lt;em&gt; help ????here: &lt;a
href="https://t.co/fErFdtN98a"&gt;https://t.co/fErFdtN98a&lt;/a&gt;&lt;/em&gt;

Followers: 1737349; Follows: 2355

Retweet Count: 87; Favorite Count: 932

&lt;hr /&gt;

Date: 10/5/2017, Time: 8:24:00. Tweet ID: 915960918315618304

Tweet URL: &lt;a
href="https://twitter.com/Lin\_Manuel/status/915960918315618304"&gt;https://twitter.com/Lin\_Manuel/status/915960918315618304&lt;/a&gt;

Message: &lt;a
href="https://twitter.com/OwenElphick"&gt;@OwenElphick&lt;/a&gt; Get
some soft furniture for your feelings..you're going to

be up in them for a while

Bio:&lt;em&gt; Space Cadet. help ????here: &lt;a
href="https://t.co/fErFdtN98a"&gt;https://t.co/fErFdtN98a&lt;/a&gt;&lt;/em&gt;

Followers: 1773273; Follows: 2362

Retweet Count: 2; Favorite Count: 21

Reply to: OwenElphick

&lt;hr /&gt;

Date: 10/5/2017, Time: 19:35:00. Tweet ID: 915767393389031424

Tweet URL: &lt;a
href="https://twitter.com/Lin\_Manuel/status/915767393389031424"&gt;https://twitter.com/Lin\_Manuel/status/915767393389031424&lt;/a&gt;

Message: Gnight y'all. Can't wait for you to hear this song. Song title
and

artwork tomorrow. Keep doing good. \[MoveOn Hurricane Donation website
url\]

&lt;a
href="https://t.co/zSVF95W25A"&gt;https://t.co/zSVF95W25A&lt;/a&gt;

Bio:&lt;em&gt; Space Cadet. help ????here: &lt;a
href="https://t.co/fErFdtN98a"&gt;https://t.co/fErFdtN98a&lt;/a&gt;&lt;/em&gt;

Followers: 1771925; Follows: 2360

Retweet Count: 207; Favorite Count: 1161

&lt;hr /&gt;

Date: 10/6/2017, Time: 8:02:00. Tweet ID: 916317656118169600

Tweet URL: &lt;a
href="https://twitter.com/lin\_manuel/status/916317656118169600"&gt;https://twitter.com/lin\_manuel/status/916317656118169600&lt;/a&gt;

Message: Thank you Jessica for your art! Get your fundraiser merch here,
all

proceeds to &lt;a
href="https://t.co/ZyorV0Keim"&gt;https://t.co/ZyorV0Keim&lt;/a&gt;
&lt;a
href="https://t.co/rMSUIA51iE"&gt;https://t.co/rMSUIA51iE&lt;/a&gt;

Bio:&lt;em&gt; Space Cadet. help ????here: &lt;a
href="https://t.co/fErFdtN98a"&gt;https://t.co/fErFdtN98a&lt;/a&gt;&lt;/em&gt;

Followers: 1779953; Follows: 2362

Retweet Count: 22; Favorite Count: 137

&lt;hr /&gt;

Date: 10/10/2017, Time: 7:08:00. Tweet ID: 917753737984266240

Tweet URL: &lt;a
href="https://twitter.com/lin\_manuel/status/917753737984266240"&gt;https://twitter.com/lin\_manuel/status/917753737984266240&lt;/a&gt;

Message: Thanks for your service, gentlemen. &lt;a
href="https://twitter.com/fema"&gt;@fema&lt;/a&gt; &lt;a
href="https://twitter.com/realDonaldTrump"&gt;@realDonaldTrump&lt;/a&gt;

&lt;a
href="https://t.co/VF9rGMfjia"&gt;https://t.co/VF9rGMfjia&lt;/a&gt;

Bio:&lt;em&gt; Space Cadet. help ????here: &lt;a
href="https://t.co/fErFdtN98a"&gt;https://t.co/fErFdtN98a&lt;/a&gt;&lt;/em&gt;

Followers: 1801925; Follows: 2363

Retweet Count: 373; Favorite Count: 1110

&lt;hr /&gt;

Date: 10/25/2017, Time: 7:04:39. Tweet ID: 923188560882290693

Tweet URL: &lt;a
href="https://twitter.com/lin\_manuel/status/923188560882290693"&gt;https://twitter.com/lin\_manuel/status/923188560882290693&lt;/a&gt;

Location: The Weyerdest Zoo

Message: Gmorning. Set the thermostat for your heart today. The temp
where you

like it. You know yourself, you know what you need. Take your time.

Bio:&lt;em&gt; Space Cadet. help ????here: &lt;a
href="https://t.co/fErFdtN98a"&gt;https://t.co/fErFdtN98a&lt;/a&gt;&lt;/em&gt;

Followers: 1843732; Follows: 2388

Retweet Count: 673; Favorite Count: 2263

&lt;hr /&gt;

Date: 10/25/2017, Time: 19:04:13. Tweet ID: 923369643380748288

Tweet URL: &lt;a
href="https://twitter.com/lin\_manuel/status/923369643380748288"&gt;https://twitter.com/lin\_manuel/status/923369643380748288&lt;/a&gt;

Location: The Weyerdest Zoo

Message: Gnight. Set the thermostat for your heart tonight. The temp
where you

like it. You know yourself, you know what you need. Take your time.

Bio:&lt;em&gt; Space Cadet. help ????here: &lt;a
href="https://t.co/fErFdtN98a"&gt;https://t.co/fErFdtN98a&lt;/a&gt;&lt;/em&gt;

Followers: 1843519; Follows: 2390

Retweet Count: 749; Favorite Count: 3045

&lt;hr /&gt;

Date: 10/26/2017, Time: 7:28:00. Tweet ID: 923556969780215811

Tweet URL: &lt;a
href="https://twitter.com/lin\_manuel/status/923556969780215811"&gt;https://twitter.com/lin\_manuel/status/923556969780215811&lt;/a&gt;

Location: The Weyerdest Zoo

Message: Good morning. \*places a big ol' smooch on the table\* that's
for you if

you need it &lt;a
href="https://t.co/0FSMpyWmKJ"&gt;https://t.co/0FSMpyWmKJ&lt;/a&gt;

Bio:&lt;em&gt; Space Cadet. help ????here: &lt;a
href="https://t.co/fErFdtN98a"&gt;https://t.co/fErFdtN98a&lt;/a&gt;&lt;/em&gt;

Followers: 1844548; Follows: 2391

Retweet Count: 212; Favorite Count: 955

&lt;hr /&gt;

Date: 10/26/2017, Time: 19:54:28. Tweet ID: 923744677546864640

Tweet URL: &lt;a
href="https://twitter.com/lin\_manuel/status/923744677546864640"&gt;https://twitter.com/lin\_manuel/status/923744677546864640&lt;/a&gt;

Location: The Weyerdest Zoo

Message: Good night. \*places a big ol' smooch on the table\* that's for
you if you

need it &lt;a
href="https://t.co/S6Oiae4SDz"&gt;https://t.co/S6Oiae4SDz&lt;/a&gt;

Bio:&lt;em&gt; Space Cadet. help ????here: &lt;a
href="https://t.co/fErFdtN98a"&gt;https://t.co/fErFdtN98a&lt;/a&gt;&lt;/em&gt;

Followers: 1845765; Follows: 2391

Retweet Count: 275; Favorite Count: 1553

&lt;hr /&gt;

Date: 10/31/2017, Time: 7:07:20. Tweet ID: 925363561827913729

Tweet URL: &lt;a
href="https://twitter.com/lin\_manuel/status/925363561827913729"&gt;https://twitter.com/lin\_manuel/status/925363561827913729&lt;/a&gt;

Location: The Weyerdest Zoo

Message: Here's the playlist for your SPOOKY DISPARATE MUSIC STREAMING
SERVICES &lt;a
href="https://t.co/Ai8tQlJIhX"&gt;https://t.co/Ai8tQlJIhX&lt;/a&gt;

Bio:&lt;em&gt; Space Cadet. help ????here: &lt;a
href="https://t.co/fErFdtN98a"&gt;https://t.co/fErFdtN98a&lt;/a&gt;&lt;/em&gt;

Followers: 1854087; Follows: 2395

Retweet Count: 86; Favorite Count: 672

Reply to: Lin\_Manuel

&lt;hr /&gt;

Date: 10/31/2017, Time: 7:10:37; Tweet ID: 925364391062712320

Tweet URL: &lt;a
href="https://twitter.com/lin\_manuel/status/925364391062712320"&gt;https://twitter.com/lin\_manuel/status/925364391062712320&lt;/a&gt;

Location: The Weyerdest Zoo

Message: &lt;a
href="https://twitter.com/NtDestinysChild"&gt;@NtDestinysChild&lt;/a&gt;
I have TWO rocky horrors on there and still you

kvetch?! Have some pennies for your Halloween bag, kid

Bio:&lt;em&gt; Space Cadet. help ????here: &lt;a
href="https://t.co/fErFdtN98a"&gt;https://t.co/fErFdtN98a&lt;/a&gt;&lt;/em&gt;

Followers: 1854087; Follows: 2395

Retweet Count: 0; Favorite Count: 18

Reply to: NtDestinysChild

&lt;hr /&gt;

Date: 11/1/2017, Time: 5:36:00. Tweet ID: 925703075779706882

Tweet URL: &lt;a
href="https://twitter.com/lin\_manuel/status/925703075779706882"&gt;https://twitter.com/lin\_manuel/status/925703075779706882&lt;/a&gt;

Location: The Weyerdest Zoo

Message: Good morning. Protect your heart and mind. Protect your time.
This is

YOUR life. And here it goes. I'm rooting for you.

Bio:&lt;em&gt; Space Cadet. help ????here: &lt;a
href="https://t.co/fErFdtN98a"&gt;https://t.co/fErFdtN98a&lt;/a&gt;&lt;/em&gt;

Followers: 1857007; Follows: 2395

Retweet Count: 1061; Favorite Count: 3046

&lt;hr /&gt;

Date: 11/1/2017, Time: 6:57:00. Tweet ID: 925723408054267904

Tweet URL: &lt;a
href="https://twitter.com/lin\_manuel/status/925723408054267904"&gt;https://twitter.com/lin\_manuel/status/925723408054267904&lt;/a&gt;

Location: The Weyerdest Zoo

Message: I'm ready for you, Windy City &lt;a
href="https://twitter.com/hashtag/thatcoattho"&gt;\#Thatcoattho&lt;/a&gt;
&lt;a
href="https://t.co/ezn9zes2y5"&gt;https://t.co/ezn9zes2y5&lt;/a&gt;

Bio:&lt;em&gt; Space Cadet. help ????here: &lt;a
href="https://t.co/fErFdtN98a"&gt;https://t.co/fErFdtN98a&lt;/a&gt;&lt;/em&gt;

Followers: 1857139; Follows: 2395

Retweet Count: 83; Favorite Count: 1068

&lt;hr /&gt;

Date: 11/2/2017; Time: 21:39:00. Tweet ID: 925945331833032704

Tweet URL: &lt;a
href="https://twitter.com/lin\_manuel/status/925945331833032704"&gt;https://twitter.com/lin\_manuel/status/925945331833032704&lt;/a&gt;

Location: The Weyerdest Zoo

Message: Good night. Protect your heart and mind. Protect your time.
This is YOUR

life. And here it goes. I'm rooting for you.

Bio:&lt;em&gt; Space Cadet. help ????here: &lt;a
href="https://t.co/fErFdtN98a"&gt;https://t.co/fErFdtN98a&lt;/a&gt;&lt;/em&gt;

Followers: 1862301; Follows: 2396

Retweet Count: 988; Favorite Count: 2830

&lt;hr /&gt;

Date: 11/8/2017, Time: 10:22:00. Tweet ID: 928326987051085824

Tweet URL: &lt;a
href="https://twitter.com/lin\_manuel/status/928326987051085824"&gt;https://twitter.com/lin\_manuel/status/928326987051085824&lt;/a&gt;

Location: The Weyerdest Zoo

Message: GRACIAS UPR Rio Piedras! It was your time and you used it well.
Can't

wait to play for you. &lt;a
href="https://t.co/cbdTuijEtH"&gt;https://t.co/cbdTuijEtH&lt;/a&gt;

Bio:&lt;em&gt; Space Cadet. help ????here: &lt;a
href="https://t.co/fErFdtN98a"&gt;https://t.co/fErFdtN98a&lt;/a&gt;&lt;/em&gt;

Followers: 1882367; Follows: 2400

Retweet Count: 74; Favorite Count: 504

&lt;hr /&gt;

Date: 11/10/2017, Time: 12:00:00. Tweet ID: 929076214362464256

Tweet URL: &lt;a
href="https://twitter.com/lin\_manuel/status/929076214362464256"&gt;https://twitter.com/lin\_manuel/status/929076214362464256&lt;/a&gt;

Location: The Weyerdest Zoo

Message: I don't really have a way to repay you for your generosity so
here is me

in &lt;a href="https://twitter.com/JLo"&gt;@JLo&lt;/a&gt; drag in a
college talent show... &lt;a
href="https://t.co/x4IA0MaV4b"&gt;https://t.co/x4IA0MaV4b&lt;/a&gt;

Bio:&lt;em&gt; just eating chicken tenders &amp; making mixes. &lt;a
href="https://t.co/fErFdtN98a"&gt;https://t.co/fErFdtN98a&lt;/a&gt;&lt;/em&gt;

Followers: 1887561; Follows: 2406

Retweet Count: 176; Favorite Count: 801

&lt;hr /&gt;

Date: 11/13/2017, Time: 7:08:00. Tweet ID: 930089874455236608

Tweet URL: &lt;a
href="https://twitter.com/lin\_manuel/status/930089874455236608"&gt;https://twitter.com/lin\_manuel/status/930089874455236608&lt;/a&gt;

Location: The Weyerdest Zoo

&lt;strong&gt;Message&lt;/strong&gt;: When you go full Ferris Bueller
for your friends &lt;a
href="https://twitter.com/sydneemcelroy"&gt;@sydneemcelroy&lt;/a&gt;
&amp;

&lt;a
href="https://twitter.com/JustinMcElroy"&gt;@JustinMcElroy&lt;/a&gt;,
you might end up onstage in Margaritaville...

&lt;a
href="https://t.co/sQW2sFNuaE"&gt;https://t.co/sQW2sFNuaE&lt;/a&gt;

Bio:&lt;em&gt; just eating chicken tenders &amp; making mixes. &lt;a
href="https://t.co/fErFdtN98a"&gt;https://t.co/fErFdtN98a&lt;/a&gt;&lt;/em&gt;

Followers: 1895360; Follows: 2408

Retweet Count: 132; Favorite Count: 1834

&lt;hr /&gt;

Date: 11/15/2017, Time: 8:58:00. Tweet ID: 930842328591351808

Tweet URL: &lt;a
href="https://twitter.com/lin\_manuel/status/930842328591351808"&gt;https://twitter.com/lin\_manuel/status/930842328591351808&lt;/a&gt;

Location: The Weyerdest Zoo

&lt;strong&gt;Message&lt;/strong&gt;: Gmorning! \*momentarily realize
that thousands of generations lived, met,

migrated, f\*\*\*ed &amp; died for you to wake up where you are\*
Coffee?

Bio:&lt;em&gt; just eating chicken tenders &amp; making mixes. &lt;a
href="https://t.co/fErFdtN98a"&gt;https://t.co/fErFdtN98a&lt;/a&gt;&lt;/em&gt;

Followers: 1902386; Follows: 2411

Retweet Count: 440; Favorite Count: 2008

&lt;hr /&gt;

Date: 11/22/2017, Time: 14:40:00. Tweet ID: 933465276187848707

Tweet URL: &lt;a
href="https://twitter.com/Lin\_Manuel/status/933465276187848707"&gt;https://twitter.com/Lin\_Manuel/status/933465276187848707&lt;/a&gt;

Location: The Weyerdest Zoo

&lt;strong&gt;Message&lt;/strong&gt;: &lt;a
href="http://twitter.com/wintaru"&gt;@wintaru&lt;/a&gt; So I wish I had
a time machine for you. I don't. But be there,

feel all of it,knowing that each year will wear down that hurt, like an
unceasing tide.

&lt;a
href="https://t.co/olNvNx3M3w"&gt;https://t.co/olNvNx3M3w&lt;/a&gt;

Bio:&lt;em&gt; just eating chicken tenders &amp; making mixes. &lt;a
href="https://t.co/fErFdtN98a"&gt;https://t.co/fErFdtN98a&lt;/a&gt;&lt;/em&gt;

Followers: 1928982; Follows: 2415

Retweet Count: 0; Favorite Count: 3

Reply to: Lin\_Manuel

&lt;hr /&gt;

Date: 11/29/2017, Time: 6:57:00. Tweet ID: 935885377814106113

Tweet URL: &lt;a
href="https://twitter.com/lin\_manuel/status/935885377814106113"&gt;https://twitter.com/lin\_manuel/status/935885377814106113&lt;/a&gt;

Location: London yall.

&lt;strong&gt;Message&lt;/strong&gt;: Here's the playlist order, for
your discmans and Fisher Price players

&lt;a
href="https://t.co/lB73ivSUe3"&gt;https://t.co/lB73ivSUe3&lt;/a&gt;

Bio:&lt;em&gt; just eating chicken tenders &amp; making mixes. &lt;a
href="https://t.co/fErFdtN98a"&gt;https://t.co/fErFdtN98a&lt;/a&gt;&lt;/em&gt;

Followers: 1954453; Follows: 2422

Retweet Count: 53; Favorite Count: 456

Reply to: Lin\_Manuel

&lt;hr /&gt;

Date: 12/4/2017, Time: 16:05:00. Tweet ID: 937835202159808514

Tweet URL: &lt;a
href="https://twitter.com/lin\_manuel/status/937835202159808514"&gt;https://twitter.com/lin\_manuel/status/937835202159808514&lt;/a&gt;

Location: London yall.

&lt;strong&gt;Message&lt;/strong&gt;: Good night! \[&lt;a
href="https://emojipedia.org/apple/ios-10.3/white-up-pointing-backhand-index-type-3/"&gt;Up
pointing backhand index Medium Light Skin Tone Emoji&lt;/a&gt;\] \[&lt;a
href="https://emojipedia.org/apple/ios-10.3/white-up-pointing-backhand-index-type-3/"&gt;Up
pointing backhand index Medium Light Skin Tone Emoji&lt;/a&gt;\] \[&lt;a
href="https://emojipedia.org/white-down-pointing-backhand-index-type-4/"&gt;Down
pointing backhand index Medium Skin Tone Emoji&lt;/a&gt;\] \[&lt;a
href="https://emojipedia.org/white-down-pointing-backhand-index-type-4/"&gt;Down
pointing backhand index Medium Skin Tone Emoji&lt;/a&gt;\] \[&lt;a
href="https://emojipedia.org/emojione/2.1/white-left-pointing-backhand-index-type-3/"&gt;Left
pointing backhand index Medium Light Skin Tone Emoji&lt;/a&gt;\] \[&lt;a
href="https://emojipedia.org/white-right-pointing-backhand-index-type-4/"&gt;Right
pointing backhand index Medium Skin Tone Emoji&lt;/a&gt;\] \[&lt;a
href="https://emojipedia.org/emojione/2.1/white-left-pointing-backhand-index-type-3/"&gt;Left
pointing backhand index Medium Light Skin Tone Emoji&lt;/a&gt;\] \[&lt;a
href="https://emojipedia.org/white-right-pointing-backhand-index-type-5/"&gt;Right
pointing backhand index Medium Skin Tone Emoji&lt;/a&gt;\] B A B A
select start 30 life cheat code for you zzzzzzzzzzzz

Bio:&lt;em&gt; just eating chicken tenders &amp; making mixes. &lt;a
href="https://t.co/fErFdtN98a"&gt;https://t.co/fErFdtN98a&lt;/a&gt;&lt;/em&gt;

Followers: 1977963; Follows: 2431

Retweet Count: 245; Favorite Count: 1687

&lt;hr /&gt;

Date: 12/6/2017, Time: 16:00:00. Tweet ID: 938560881348182021

Tweet URL: &lt;a
href="https://twitter.com/lin\_manuel/status/938560881348182021"&gt;https://twitter.com/lin\_manuel/status/938560881348182021&lt;/a&gt;

Location: London yall.

&lt;strong&gt;Message&lt;/strong&gt;: The &lt;a
href="https://twitter.com/hashtag/hamiltonldn"&gt;\#HamiltonLDN&lt;/a&gt;
cast was excited for you too, &lt;a
href="https://emojipedia.org/flag-for-united-kingdom/"&gt;Flag of United
Kingdom Emoji&lt;/a&gt;. &lt;a
href="https://twitter.com/Adele"&gt;@Adele&lt;/a&gt; &lt;a
href="https://t.co/7vJGDAglVZ"&gt;https://t.co/7vJGDAglVZ&lt;/a&gt;

Bio:&lt;em&gt; just eating chicken tenders &amp; making mixes. &lt;a
href="https://t.co/fErFdtN98a"&gt;https://t.co/fErFdtN98a&lt;/a&gt;&lt;/em&gt;

Followers: 1985760; Follows: 2432

Retweet Count: 225; Favorite Count: 1419

&lt;hr /&gt;

Date: 12/11/2017, Time: 6:19:00. Tweet ID: 940224436485218305

Tweet URL: &lt;a
href="https://twitter.com/lin\_manuel/status/940224436485218305"&gt;https://twitter.com/lin\_manuel/status/940224436485218305&lt;/a&gt;

Location: London yall.

&lt;strong&gt;Message&lt;/strong&gt;: I am in the deepest NY traffic and
working on a study mix for you, as I

understand the youths have finals.

Bio:&lt;em&gt; just eating chicken tenders &amp; making mixes. &lt;a
href="https://t.co/fErFdtN98a"&gt;https://t.co/fErFdtN98a&lt;/a&gt;&lt;/em&gt;

Followers: 1997705; Follows: 2436

Retweet Count: 383; Favorite Count: 3788

&lt;hr /&gt;

Date: 12/11/2017, Time: 6:59:00. Tweet ID: 940234538445365249

Tweet URL: &lt;a
href="https://twitter.com/lin\_manuel/status/940234538445365249"&gt;https://twitter.com/lin\_manuel/status/940234538445365249&lt;/a&gt;

Location: London yall.

&lt;strong&gt;Message&lt;/strong&gt;: Here's the playlist, for your
various delivery systems &amp; aux cables:

&lt;a
href="https://t.co/5BEy5FpMQt"&gt;https://t.co/5BEy5FpMQt&lt;/a&gt;

Bio:&lt;em&gt; just eating chicken tenders &amp; making mixes. &lt;a
href="https://t.co/fErFdtN98a"&gt;https://t.co/fErFdtN98a&lt;/a&gt;&lt;/em&gt;

Followers: 1997705; Follows: 2436

Retweet Count: 94; Favorite Count: 627

&lt;hr /&gt;

Date: 12/11/2017, Time: 15:12:00. Tweet ID: 940358706734227456

Tweet URL: &lt;a
href="https://twitter.com/lin\_manuel/status/940358706734227456"&gt;https://twitter.com/lin\_manuel/status/940358706734227456&lt;/a&gt;

Location: At places.

&lt;strong&gt;Message&lt;/strong&gt;: @giannamgunter &lt;a
href="https://twitter.com/tinycactusqueen"&gt;@tinycactusqueen&lt;/a&gt;
&lt;a
href="https://twitter.com/ARamosofficial"&gt;@ARamosofficial&lt;/a&gt;
Well Obviously Anthony is too distracting for your study mix back to
work \[Insert GIF\]:

&lt;a
href="https://t.co/20WNmbUmlv"&gt;https://t.co/20WNmbUmlv&lt;/a&gt;

Bio:&lt;em&gt; making you things. &lt;a
href="//t.co/2OovQ5DLMc”"&gt;https://t.co/2OovQ5DLMc&lt;/a&gt;&lt;/em&gt;

Followers: 1999617; Follows: 2437

Retweet Count: 5; Favorite Count: 10

Reply to: giannamgunter

&lt;hr /&gt;

Date: 12/11/2017, Time: 18:38:00. Tweet ID: 940410477989060614

Tweet URL: &lt;a
href="//twitter.com/lin\_manuel/status/940410477989060614”"&gt;
https://twitter.com/lin\_manuel/status/940410477989060614&lt;/a&gt;

Location: At places.

&lt;strong&gt;Message&lt;/strong&gt;: Kelly throwin' Bowes (on your
Bose?) takin' Bows Puerto Rico, just for you, I'll rock my Hamilton
blouse &lt;a
href="https://twitter.com/hashtag/2mil2bars?lang=en"&gt;\#2Mil2Bars&lt;/a&gt;
&lt;a href="//t.co/CaYL0Ag3Dd”"&gt;https://t.co/CaYL0Ag3Dd &lt;/a&gt;

Bio:&lt;em&gt; making you things. &lt;a
href="//t.co/2OovQ5DLMc”"&gt;https://t.co/2OovQ5DLMc&lt;/a&gt;&lt;/em&gt;

Followers: 2000739; Follows: 2437

Retweet Count: 39; Favorite Count: 530

&lt;hr /&gt;

Date: 12/14/2017, Time: 14:53:02. Tweet ID: 941320129488486400

Tweet URL: &lt;a
href="//twitter.com/Lin\_Manuel/status/941320129488486400”"&gt;
https://twitter.com/Lin\_Manuel/status/941320129488486400&lt;/a&gt;

Location: At places.

&lt;strong&gt;Message&lt;/strong&gt;: Joe, stunned you had to hear it
from me, a playwright/actor and tweeter of dogs, but that's 2017 for
you. It is unconscionable. Take it out.

&lt;a href="//t.co/AezQSFU9SD”"&gt;https://t.co/AezQSFU9SD&lt;/a&gt;

Bio:&lt;em&gt; making you things. &lt;a
href="//t.co/2OovQ5DLMc”"&gt;https://t.co/2OovQ5DLMc&lt;/a&gt;&lt;/em&gt;

Followers: 2010054; Follows: 2447

Retweet Count: 239; Favorite Count: 1009

&lt;hr /&gt;

Date: 12/15/2017, Time: 4:28:19. Tweet ID: 941525301548511232

Tweet URL: &lt;a
href="//twitter.com/lin\_manuel/status/941525301548511232”"&gt;
https://twitter.com/lin\_manuel/status/941525301548511232&lt;/a&gt;

Location: At places.

&lt;strong&gt;Message&lt;/strong&gt;: America, the &lt;a
href="https://twitter.com/hashtag/hamildrop"&gt;\#HAMILDROP&lt;/a&gt;
has dropped! Here's a link for your listening doodad of choice: &lt;a
href="//t.co/FCLzGtBIKp”"&gt;https://t.co/FCLzGtBIKp&lt;/a&gt;

Bio:&lt;em&gt; making you things. &lt;a
href="//t.co/2OovQ5DLMc”"&gt;https://t.co/2OovQ5DLMc&lt;/a&gt;&lt;/em&gt;

Followers: 2012482; Follows: 2448

Retweet Count: 124; Favorite Count: 480

&lt;hr /&gt;

Date: 12/18/2017, Time: 19:07:53. Tweet ID: 942833817722777601

Tweet URL: &lt;a
href="//twitter.com/lin\_manuel/status/942833817722777601”"&gt;
https:/twitter.com/lin\_manuel/status/942833817722777601&lt;/a&gt;

Location: At places.

&lt;strong&gt;Message&lt;/strong&gt;: Trying to stay off Twitter to
avoid Jedi spoilers but our friends at &lt;a
href="https://twitter.com/MoveOn"&gt;@MoveOn&lt;/a&gt; made it SO easy
for you to urge your reps to help &lt;a
href="https://emojipedia.org/flag-for-puerto-rico/"&gt;Flag of Puerto
Rico Emoji&lt;/a&gt;: &lt;a href="//t.co/TFH5eaj82U”"&gt;
https:/t.co/TFH5eaj82U&lt;/a&gt;

Bio:&lt;em&gt; making you things. &lt;a
href="https://t.co/2OovQ5DLMc"&gt;https://t.co/2OovQ5DLMc&lt;/a&gt;&lt;/em&gt;

Followers: 2019406; Follows: 2454

Retweet Count: 94; Favorite Count: 470

&lt;hr /&gt;

Date: 1/16/2018, Time: 8:01:22. Tweet ID: 953296127142621184

Tweet URL: &lt;a
href="https://twitter.com/Lin\_Manuel/status/953296127142621184"&gt;https://twitter.com/Lin\_Manuel/status/953296127142621184&lt;/a&gt;

Location: Tick...tick...tick...

Message: &lt;a href="https://twitter.com/joshgad"&gt;@joshgad&lt;/a&gt;
Eeeeee, Gad! Thanks friendo. Grateful for you too. Time to to

time to to TIME TUH

Bio:&lt;em&gt; making you things. &lt;a
href="https://t.co/1owIIRjDha"&gt;https://t.co/1owIIRjDha&lt;/a&gt;&lt;/em&gt;

Followers: 2104294; Follows: 2525

Retweet Count: 18; Favorite Count: 357

Reply to: joshgad

&lt;hr /&gt;

Date: 1/16/2018, Time: 14:48:10. Tweet ID: 953398501567877126

Tweet URL: &lt;a
href="https://twitter.com/Lin\_Manuel/status/953398501567877126"&gt;https://twitter.com/Lin\_Manuel/status/953398501567877126&lt;/a&gt;

Location: Tick...tick...tick...

Message: Luwoye, they ain’t remotely ready for you. Eat em up maestro.

&lt;a
href="https://t.co/W2f7OuWWU5"&gt;https://t.co/W2f7OuWWU5&lt;/a&gt;

Bio:&lt;em&gt; making you things. &lt;a
href="https://t.co/1owIIRjDha"&gt;https://t.co/1owIIRjDha&lt;/a&gt;&lt;/em&gt;

Followers: 2104294; Follows: 2525

Retweet Count: 67; Favorite Count: 1649

&lt;hr /&gt;

Date: 1/17/2018, Time: 14:00:23. Tweet ID: 953748861629222912

Tweet URL: &lt;a
href="https://twitter.com/Lin\_Manuel/status/953748861629222912"&gt;https://twitter.com/Lin\_Manuel/status/953748861629222912&lt;/a&gt;

Location: Tick...tick...tick...

Message: &lt;a
href="https://twitter.com/AudraEqualityMe"&gt;@AudraEqualityMc&lt;/a&gt;
But I'm super duper grateful for you...

&lt;a
href="https://t.co/Jb2tR9rsI1"&gt;https://t.co/Jb2tR9rsI1&lt;/a&gt;

Bio:&lt;em&gt; making you things. &lt;a
href="https://t.co/1owIIRjDha"&gt;https://t.co/1owIIRjDha&lt;/a&gt;&lt;/em&gt;

Followers: 2105840; Follows: 2528

Retweet Count: 4; Favorite Count: 75

[^1]: Lin-Manuel Miranda, *Gmorning, Gnight! Little Pep Talks for Me and
    You*, illus. Jonny Sun (New York: Random House, 2018).

[^2]: Lin-Manuel Miranda (@Lin\_Manuel), “Gmorning! A bit of news—At
    YOUR request, we made a book of the Gmornings & Gnights!
    Illustrations by @jonnysun! Available October 23! We love you!,”
    Twitter, 17 July 2018, 5:00 am,
    [*https://web.archive.org/web/20180717122340/https://twitter.com/lin\_manuel/status/1019190030387073025*](https://web.archive.org/web/20180717122340/https://twitter.com/lin_manuel/status/1019190030387073025).

[^3]: I draw on my prior work situating Miranda within a broader history
    of US Latinx politics as well as the institution of Broadway theater
    in particular; see Elena Machado Sáez, “Bodega Sold Dreams:
    Middle-Class Panic and the Crossover Aesthetics of *In the
    Heights*,” in *Dialectical Imaginaries: Materialist Approaches to US
    Latino/a Literature in the Age of Neoliberalism*, ed. Marcial
    Gonzalez and Carlos Gallego (Ann Arbor: University of Michigan
    Press, 2018), and “Blackout on Broadway: Affiliation and Audience
    in *In the Heights* and *Hamilton*,” *Studies in Musical Theater*
    12, no. 2 (2018): 181–97. In both essays, I make the case that
    Miranda’s *In the Heights* and *Hamilton* ambivalently balance a
    counter-narrative to a history of stereotype on the Broadway stage
    with the goal of convincing the predominantly white, highly educated
    tourists in attendance that the “other” is one of them. Having
    written these essays addressing the themes of belonging, race,
    politics, class, and audience, I am interested in investigating how
    the copious amounts of text that Miranda produces via Twitter
    conveys a broader philosophy on the intersection of aesthetics and
    politics on social media.

[^4]: Patricia Ybarra, “How to Read a Latinx Play in the Twenty-First
    Century: Learning from Quiara Hudes,” *Theatre Topics* 27, no. 1
    (2017): 49.

[^5]: Twitter homepage, 2018,
    [*https://web.archive.org/web/20180717110859/https://twitter.com/*](https://web.archive.org/web/20180717110859/https://twitter.com/).

[^6]: Christopher B. Balme, *The Theatrical Public Sphere* (Cambridge:
    Cambridge University Press, 2014), 4–5.

[^7]: Ibid., 7.

[^8]: Dorothy Kim, “The Rules of Twitter,” *Hybrid Pedagogy*, 4 December
    2014,
    [*https://hybridpedagogy.org/rules-twitter/*](https://hybridpedagogy.org/rules-twitter/).

[^9]: Dorothy Kim and Eunsong Kim, “The \#TwitterEthics Manifesto,”
    *Model View Culture*, 7 April 2014,
    [*https://modelviewculture.com/pieces/the-twitterethics-manifesto*](https://modelviewculture.com/pieces/the-twitterethics-manifesto).

[^10]: Elizabeth Losh, *Hashtag* (New York: Bloombury Academic, 2019),
    110.

[^11]: Sydette Harry, “Everyone Watches, Nobody Sees: How Black Women
    Disrupt Surveillance Theory,” *Model View Culture*, 6 October 2014,
    <http://modelviewculture.com/pieces/everyone-watches-nobody-sees-how-black-women-disrupt-surveillance-theory>.

[^12]: Ibid.

[^13]: Ibid.

[^14]: Lisa Nakamura, “The Unwanted Labour of Social Media: Women of
    Colour Call Out Culture As Venture Community Management,” *New
    Formations*, no. 86 (2015): 106.

[^15]: Ibid., 108.

[^16]: Ibid., 110.

[^17]: Macarena Gómez-Barris, introduction to *Beyond the Pink Tide: Art
    and Political Undercurrents in the Americas* (Oakland: University of
    California Press, 2018), 13.

[^18]: Dorothy Kim, “Social Media and Academic Surveillance: The Ethics
    of Digital Bodies,” *Model View Culture*, 7 October 2014,
    [*http://modelviewculture.com/pieces/social-media-and-academic-surveillance-the-ethics-of-digital-bodies*](http://modelviewculture.com/pieces/social-media-and-academic-surveillance-the-ethics-of-digital-bodies).

[^19]: Shoshana Zuboff, *The Age of Surveillance Capitalism: The Fight
    for a Human Future at the New Frontier of Power* (New York:
    PublicAffairs, 2019), 111–12.

[^20]: Ibid., 112.

[^21]: Elena Machado Sáez, “Permission Request to Cite Tweets in
    Academic Publication,” e-mail message to Marissa Chibas, 19
    September 2019.

[^22]: Helena Webb, Marina Jirotka, Bernd Carsten Stahl, William
    Housley, Adam Edwards, Matthew Williams, Rob Procter, Omer Rana, and
    Pete Burnap, “The Ethical Challenges of Publishing Twitter Data for
    Research Dissemination,” in *WebSci’17: Proceedings of the 2017 ACM
    Web Science Conference* (New York: Association for Computing
    Machinery, 2018), 340, 342. 341.

[^23]: Ibid., 343.

[^24]: Ibid., 341.

[^25]: Marissa Chibas Preston, “Re: Marissa Chibas ‘Permission Request
    to Cite Tweets in Academic Publication,’” e-mail message to Elena
    Machado Sáez, 27 September 2019; Charlie Vázquez, “Re: Permission
    Request to Cite Tweets in Academic Publication,” e-mail message to
    Elena Machado Sáez, 20 September 2019.

[^26]: Elena Machado Sáez, “Latinx Twitter: Lin-Manuel Miranda; ‘For
    You’ Tweets from March 2017 until January 2018,”
    [*https://web.archive.org/web/20180724174411/http://elenamachado.blogs.bucknell.edu/work-in-progress/latinx-twitter-lin-manuel-miranda/*](https://web.archive.org/web/20180724174411/http://elenamachado.blogs.bucknell.edu/work-in-progress/latinx-twitter-lin-manuel-miranda/).

[^27]: Charlie Vázquez (@charlievasquez), “A special shout-out to those
    of you (us) who didn't grow up with a father, or with one who wasn't
    there for you. You are champions!,” Twitter, 18 June 2017, 10:58 am,
    [*https://web.archive.org/web/20181230013539/https://twitter.com/charlievazquez/statuses/876499382488707075*](https://web.archive.org/web/20181230013539/https://twitter.com/charlievazquez/statuses/876499382488707075).

[^28]: Charlie Vázquez (@charlievasquez), “Many people close to me are
    being tested hard by the universe. My word for this season is
    ‘selflessness’. I am here for you,” Twitter, 30 May 2017, 2:37 pm,
    [*https://web.archive.org/web/20181230013652/https://twitter.com/charlievazquez/statuses/869669182526435332*](https://web.archive.org/web/20181230013652/https://twitter.com/charlievazquez/statuses/869669182526435332).

[^29]: Ricardo L. Ortíz, “Latina/o Theatre and Performance in the
    Context of Social Movements,” in *The Cambridge History of Latina/o
    American Literature*, ed. John Morán González and Laura Lomas (New
    York: Cambridge University Press, 2018), 465.

[^30]: The song takes its lyrics from the musical *West Side Story*,
    which Frances Negrón-Mutaner dubs “the diaspora’s ‘trauma’” and a
    “constitutive site for AmeRícan ethno-national identification.”
    Frances Negrón-Mutaner, “Feeling Pretty: *West Side Story* and US
    Puerto Rican Identity,” in *Boricua Pop: Puerto Ricans and the
    Latinization of American Culture* (New York: New York University
    Press, 2004), 58.

[^31]: For a nuanced and detailed analysis of how hashtags have been
    deployed, including commercial and social activist uses, see Losh,
    *Hashtag*.

[^32]: Lin-Manuel Miranda (@Lin\_Manuel), “Y’all, when I say all hands
    on deck for Puerto Rico I mean ALL HANDS ON DECK,” Twitter, 5
    October 2017, 7:48 am,
    [*https://web.archive.org/web/20181231011310/https:/twitter.com/Lin\_Manuel/status/915951732517154817*](https://web.archive.org/web/20181231011310/https:/twitter.com/Lin_Manuel/status/915951732517154817).

[^33]: For example, a 2012 *New York Post* article by Candace M. Glove
    lists Luis Miranda as a key player in Bronx “political nonprofits”;
    see Candace M. Glove, “Twi\$ted Web of Political Nonprofits in Bx,”
    *New York Post*, 26 August 2012,
    https://nypost.com/2012/08/26/twited-web-of-political-nonprofits-in-bx/.
    Additionally, a 2014 newsletter from the National Institute for
    Latino Policy (NiLP) summarizes the critical press coverage of Luis
    Miranda’s lobbying efforts; see Angelo Falcón, “The Hispanic
    Federation–Luis Miranda Connection: Undermining the Agenda of a
    Latino Community Institution,” National Institute for Latino Policy,
    10 July 2014,
    *https://web.archive.org/web/20151010000523/http://www.nilpnetwork.org/NiLP\_Commentary\_-\_Hispanic\_Federation.pdf*.

[^34]: Juan González, “Family Plays Big Role in Nurturing *Hamilton* on
    Broadway,” *New York Daily News*, 6 August 2015,
    <https://www.nydailynews.com/new-york/gonzalez-family-helps-bring-hamilton-broadway-article-1.2317665>.

[^35]: Lin-Manuel Miranda (@Lin\_Manuel), “HelloHelloHello. Introducing
    our biggest @Prizeo contest yet & the \#Ham4All Challenge! Donate at
    http://prizeo.com/Hamilton! Sing! Oh, I \[heart\] you,” Twitter, 26
    June 2017, 6:01 am,
    [*http://web.archive.org/web/20170628051129/https://twitter.com/lin\_manuel/status/879323738398916608*](http://web.archive.org/web/20170628051129/https://twitter.com/lin_manuel/status/879323738398916608).

[^36]: Immigrants: We Get the Job Done Coalition, Hispanic Federation,
    2017. For a description of the project, see
    [*https://web.archive.org/web/20170629210853/http://hispanicfederation.org/getthejobdone/*](https://web.archive.org/web/20170629210853/http://hispanicfederation.org/getthejobdone/).

[^37]: Falcón, “The Hispanic Federation–Luis Miranda Connection.”

[^38]: Jarrett Murphy, “The Numbers: Campaign Consultants Who Double as
    Lobbyists,” CityLimits.org, 13 May 2013,
    [*https://web.archive.org/web/20150408034341/http://citylimits.org/2013/05/13/the-numbers-campaign-consultants-who-double-as-lobbyists/*](https://web.archive.org/web/20150408034341/http://citylimits.org/2013/05/13/the-numbers-campaign-consultants-who-double-as-lobbyists/).

[^39]: Ken Lovett, “Now Playing: Hamilton the Political Consultant,”
    *New York Daily News*, 5 September 2016,
    <https://www.nydailynews.com/news/politics/playing-hamilton-political-consultant-article-1.2777740>.

[^40]: Lin-Manuel Miranda (@Lin\_Manuel), “In the meantime, we've
    partnered with @HispanicFed. You can donate to relief efforts here
    in two clicks: hispanicfederation.org/donate/,” Twitter, 21
    September 2017, 12:34 am,
    [*https://web.archive.org/web/20170921230833/https://twitter.com/Lin\_Manuel/status/910769261479677953*](https://web.archive.org/web/20170921230833/https://twitter.com/Lin_Manuel/status/910769261479677953).

[^41]: Lin-Manuel Miranda (@Lin\_Manuel), “Gmorning! The trains run so
    much better when my wife takes the morning shift. Let's make new
    paths today. hispanicfederation.org/donate,” Twitter, 27 September
    2017, 5:55 am,
    [*https://web.archive.org/web/20181231191605/https://twitter.com/Lin\_Manuel/status/913024298654273536*](https://web.archive.org/web/20181231191605/https://twitter.com/Lin_Manuel/status/913024298654273536).

[^42]: Michael Paulson, “Lin-Manuel Miranda’s Passion for Puerto Rico,”
    *New York Times*, 26 December 2018,
    <https://www.nytimes.com/2018/12/26/theater/hamilton-puerto-rico-lin-manuel-miranda.html>.

[^43]: For example, Paulson’s article notes in passing that Miranda
    “conducts” his philanthropy in “collaboration with his family” but
    does not explain how the Hispanic Federation fits into that
    narrative (ibid.).

[^44]: Twitter bio for Lin-Manuel Miranda (@Lin\_Manuel), in January
    2018, with varying bio photos; see figure 24,
    <http://web.archive.org/web/20180106034514/https:/twitter.com/lin_manuel>,
    and
    [http://web.archive.org/web/20180107153834/https://twitter.com/lin\_manuel](http://web.archive.org/web/20180107153834/https:/twitter.com/lin_manuel).

[^45]: See Lin-Manuel Miranda, as told to Frank DiGiacomo, “*Hamilton*'s
    Lin-Manuel Miranda on Finding Originality, Racial Politics (and Why
    Trump Should See His Show),” *Hollywood Reporter*, 12 August 2015,
    <https://www.hollywoodreporter.com/features/hamiltons-lin-manuel-miranda-finding-814657>.

[^46]: Lin-Manuel Miranda (@Lin\_Manuel), “It is literally my job to put
    songs in order to make you feel things. I've had a ton of practice,”
    Twitter, 14 August 2017, 4:46 pm,
    [*https://web.archive.org/web/20181231000057/https://twitter.com/lin\_manuel/status/897242937788125184*](https://web.archive.org/web/20181231000057/https://twitter.com/lin_manuel/status/897242937788125184).

[^47]: Elizabeth Titrington Craft, “‘Is This What It Takes Just to Make
    It to Broadway?!’: Marketing *In the Heights* in the Twenty-First
    Century,” *Studies in Musical Theater* 5, no. 1 (2011): 58, 62, 59.

[^48]: Ibid., 58.

[^49]: Lin-Manuel Miranda (@Lin\_Manuel), “Good morning! Woke up
    grateful for you, and this lady, and that guy, and everything,”
    Twitter, 12 June 2017, 6:03 am,
    [*https://web.archive.org/web/20181231001111/https://twitter.com/Lin\_Manuel/status/874250737408192514*](https://web.archive.org/web/20181231001111/https://twitter.com/Lin_Manuel/status/874250737408192514).

[^50]: Ryan P. C. Trimble (@Ryntern), “My greatest dream is to one day
    reach @Lin\_Manuel levels of ‘casting myself in things I write,’”
    Twitter (unknown date and time); Lin-Manuel Miranda (@Lin\_Manuel),
    “Oh, it's easy! 1. Realize being an actor of color means no one will
    write your dream role for you. 2. Get to writing. 3. Repeat. Good
    luck!,” Twitter, 22 September 2017, 3:15 pm,
    [*https://web.archive.org/web/20181231001344/https://twitter.com/Lin\_Manuel/status/911353178049908736*](https://web.archive.org/web/20181231001344/https://twitter.com/Lin_Manuel/status/911353178049908736).

[^51]: Lin-Manuel Miranda (@Lin\_Manuel), “Gmorning! Take the time to
    tell someone you're grateful for them. Mean it. It feels good. Try
    it. Grateful for you, & another day. Let's go!,” Twitter, 2 May
    2017, 11:39 pm,
    [*https://web.archive.org/web/20181231001500/https://twitter.com/Lin\_Manuel/status/859658638629232640*](https://web.archive.org/web/20181231001500/https://twitter.com/Lin_Manuel/status/859658638629232640).

[^52]: Lin-Manuel Miranda (@Lin\_Manuel), “Grateful for you. Can't wait
    for you to see it this summer,” Twitter, 19 May 2017, 9:03 am,
    [*https://web.archive.org/web/20181231005502/https://twitter.com/Lin\_Manuel/status/865598673278906368*](https://web.archive.org/web/20181231005502/https://twitter.com/Lin_Manuel/status/865598673278906368).

[^53]: Lin-Manuel Miranda (@Lin\_Manuel), “I can't wait for you to meet
    Moana,” Twitter, 6 January 2016, 6:26 am,
    [*https://web.archive.org/web/20181231005718/https://twitter.com/lin\_manuel/status/684742849892642817*](https://web.archive.org/web/20181231005718/https://twitter.com/lin_manuel/status/684742849892642817).

[^54]: Lin-Manuel Miranda (@Lin\_Manuel), “Texas, we are thinking about
    you and we love you and we're here for you. Be safe. \[heart\]
    \[heart\] \[heart\] \[heart\] \[heart\],” Twitter, 25 August 2017,
    7:58 am,
    [*https://web.archive.org/web/20181231010452/https://twitter.com/Lin\_Manuel/status/901096336862449669*](https://web.archive.org/web/20181231010452/https://twitter.com/Lin_Manuel/status/901096336862449669);
    “\[Puerto Rican flag\], your children and grandchildren are out here
    praying for you. Stay safe,” Twitter, 18 September 2017, 2:41 pm,
    [*https://web.archive.org/web/20181231010634/https://twitter.com/Lin\_Manuel/status/909895086061887488*](https://web.archive.org/web/20181231010634/https://twitter.com/Lin_Manuel/status/909895086061887488).

[^55]: Lin-Manuel Miranda (@Lin\_Manuel), “Dreamers, this is news for
    you. What is not news but also true: millions of Americans have your
    back and are fighting for you,” Twitter, 8 September 2017, 8:26 am,
    [*https://web.archive.org/web/20181231010851/https://twitter.com/Lin\_Manuel/status/906176961998979072*](https://web.archive.org/web/20181231010851/https://twitter.com/Lin_Manuel/status/906176961998979072).

[^56]: Lin-Manuel Miranda (@Lin\_Manuel), “@realDonaldTrump 3.5 Million
    Americans are waiting for you,” Twitter, 25 September, 7:28 am,
    [*https://web.archive.org/web/20181231011019/https://twitter.com/Lin\_Manuel/status/912323044269490184*](https://web.archive.org/web/20181231011019/https://twitter.com/Lin_Manuel/status/912323044269490184);
    “You're going straight to hell, @realDonaldTrump. No long lines for
    you. Someone will say, ‘Right this way, sir.’ They'll clear a path,”
    Twitter, 30 September 2017, 5:21 am,
    [*https://web.archive.org/web/20181231011144/https://twitter.com/Lin\_Manuel/status/914102927744217088*](https://web.archive.org/web/20181231011144/https://twitter.com/Lin_Manuel/status/914102927744217088).

[^57]: Lin-Manuel Miranda (@Lin\_Manuel), “Heartbroken and frustrated by
    the images and stories out of Puerto Rico after yesterday's
    protests. If anyone's got cause to peacefully protest their
    treatment at the hands of government, it's the people of Puerto
    Rico,” Twitter, 2 May 2018, 1:51 pm,
    [*https://web.archive.org/web/20181231191105/https://twitter.com/lin\_manuel/status/991782264659939328*](https://web.archive.org/web/20181231191105/https://twitter.com/lin_manuel/status/991782264659939328).

[^58]: For comparison, see a tweet posted on 1 May 2018 by Yarimar
    Bonilla (@yarimarbonilla), professor of anthropology at Rutgers
    University, concerning the violent government response to the
    protests: “Day of protest in PuertoRico ends w/tear gassed children,
    students, journalists + seemingly unlawful arrests of important
    activists and overwhelming spectacular police force. Then the
    governor tells @NPR reporters once again that he sees Puerto Rico as
    a blank slate”;
    [*https://web.archive.org/web/20181228014209/https://twitter.com/yarimarbonilla/status/991444555030507520*](https://web.archive.org/web/20181228014209/https://twitter.com/yarimarbonilla/status/991444555030507520).

[^59]: Jeannine Murray-Román, “Twitter's and @douenislands' Ambiguous
    Paths,” *sx archipelagos* 1, June 2016,
    <http://smallaxe.net/sxarchipelagos/issue01/murrayroman-douenislands.html>.

[^60]: Christian Howard, “Studying and Preserving the Global Networks of
    Twitter Literature,” *Post45*, 17 September 2019,
    [*http://post45.research.yale.edu/2019/09/global-networks-of-twitter-literature/*](http://post45.research.yale.edu/2019/09/global-networks-of-twitter-literature/).

[^61]: Twitter, “Get Started with Twitter APIs and Tools: Apply for
    Access,”
    [*https://developer.twitter.com/en/apply-for-access*](https://developer.twitter.com/en/apply-for-access).

[^62]: Twitter Developer Accounts, “Account Application Not Approved,”
    e-mail message to Elena Machado Sáez, 13 June 2019.

[^63]: See Documenting the Now,
    [*https://www.docnow.io/*](https://www.docnow.io/).

[^64]: Howard, “Studying and Preserving the Global Networks of Twitter
    Literature.”

[^65]: Ibid.

[^66]: Ibid.; Howard quotes Twitter’s “Developer Agreement and Policy,”
    I.F.2.b.i,
    https://developer.twitter.com/en/developer-terms/agreement-and-policy.html.

[^67]: Library of Congress, “Update on the Twitter Archive at the
    Library of Congress,” December 2017, 1,
    https://blogs.loc.gov/loc/files/2017/12/2017dec\_twitter\_white-paper.pdf.

[^68]: See Sarah Tubbs, “UH Receives Funding to Establish First US
    Digital Humanities Center for Latina/o Studies,” 15 August 2017,
    https://www.uh.edu/news-events/stories/2017/august/08152017First-digital-humanities-center-for-latino-latina-studies.php.

[^69]: Zuboff, *Age of Surveillance Capitalism*, 112.
