---
layout: article
section: reviews
title: 
  "long": "*Île en île*: A Digital Voyage of Discovery"
  "short": "A Digital Voyage of Discovery"
doi: ""
author: 
- name: Lizabeth Paravisini-Gebert 
  shortname: Paravisini-Gebert
  bio: >
    Lisa Paravisini-Gebert works in the fields of literature and cultural studies, specializing in the multidisciplinary, comparative study of the Caribbean. Growing up in her native Puerto Rico, she became fascinated by the many cultural connections between Caribbean peoples despite our different histories and languages and has made that the subject of her research and teaching. She is based in the Hispanic Studies Department at Vassar College, where she holds the Randolph Distinguished Professor Chair. She is also a participating faculty member in the Programs in Environmental Studies, Latin American Studies, International Studies, and Women's Studies at Vassar. She is the author of a number of books, among them *Phyllis Shand Allfrey: A Caribbean Life* (1996), *Jamaica Kincaid: A Critical Companion* (1999), *Creole Religions of the Caribbean* (2003, with Margarite Fernández Olmos), and most recently, *Literatures of the Caribbean* (2008). 
date: May 2022
issue: 6
order: 14
language: en
---


Long before the launch of *Île en île* in 1998, I remember Thomas as
someone focused on the new technologies surfacing around us (personal
computers, email, the internet!) as potential solutions to the
conditions in which we conducted research on what were then the
"marginal" fields of Caribbean, francophone, and post-colonial
literatures. We were then---in the mid 1980s---young colleagues at
Lehman College (CUNY) who, intrigued by the availability of personal
computers, gravitated to the computer center in search of insights into
what they could do to bridge over the gap between our fields and the
unavailability of primary materials for study. (As faculty members in
the humanities, we were indeed very *rarae aves* in Lehman's computer
center.) But at that time bookstores rarely carried titles relevant to
our research, and never those written in languages other than English;
translations were scarce, and library holdings had scant resources on
Caribbean and postcolonial literatures. Research required traveling to
special collections and long hours spent photocopying or, when
photocopying was not allowed, hours that stretched into days and weeks
copying texts by hand. Literary histories needed to be traced, copies of
rare editions of books needed to be located, texts printed in ephemeral
magazines had to be unearthed---all treasures to be discovered to set
the foundations for emerging fields. These forays far and wide in search
of materials were not without adventures. I recall in particular a
morning we spent together browsing in the bookstores of Paris' Boulevard
Saint-Michel looking for francophone novels---after which Thomas had to
rescue me from a threatened arrest. But that is a story best left for
another place and time.

The pressure to secure materials for teaching and scholarship was only
matched by the dearth of translations. The Caribbean---the area on which
my own research has been based---was then an even more linguistically
fragmented space where writers across the archipelago rarely knew one
another's work. This was a serious area of concern to Thomas, whose
vision of francophone literature was both archipelagic and global. The
late 1980s and early 1990s were marked by the attention to translation
as a necessary step in developing more holistic, multidisciplinary,
from-the-ground-up theories and methodologies to make sense of
post-colonial literary traditions. And here Thomas also had his finger
on the pulse of the problem. A gifted translator himself, Thomas kindly
contributed translations when I was working with our mutual colleague
Carmen Esteves on bringing together the short stories for *Green Cane
and Juicy Flotsam* (1991), but also generously used his (even then)
considerable contacts to help us locate and correspond with authors to
obtain the necessary translation rights and permission for publication.
His help was invaluable, and in this help we could already glimpse the
talents, interests, contacts, generosity, persistence, and drive that
would make possible *Île en île* possible a few years later. We were
not, by any stretch of the imagination, the only people he helped in
this way. This potential for collaboration and generosity were, I think,
basic qualities behind the launching of *Île en île*.

I feel a deep affection for Thomas, as we have been friends for at least
three and a half decades. And at the foundation of that friendship has
been my admiration for the dedication and work ethic behind everything
he does---and of which *Île en île* is the most public manifestation. We
bonded over obsessions with texts that could not be easily found---Marie
Chauvet's works, among them---and critical articles that seemed mythical
in their elusiveness. We had met at the height of the AIDS epidemic,
when the losses among our friends and colleagues seemed unbearable, and
looking for books, poems, stories sometimes felt like a quest for the
ghosts of those lost. An effort at recovering what should not have been
ephemeral felt somewhat like wrenching poetic justice out of the grips
of the established canon. I always think back to those days as planting
the seed for the commitment Thomas brought to *Île en île*, for the
indefatigable work of recovering, archiving, and preserving voices,
images, texts, stories that the canonical archive would never have
thought worth the effort to preserve.

I have watched *Île en île* develop through the years with a sense of awe,
perhaps because I have had privileged glimpses into the very hard work
through which the site grew from website to vital archive with so very
little support except from friends and colleagues. The polished and
elegant site belies the intense labor, frustration, and exasperation
behind its production. The lack of institutional and grant support has
been lamentable---a product perhaps of an indifference on the part of
grant agencies and academic institutions to what were considered "marginal" literatures in the early days of the construction of the archive,
coupled with its development during a time when academia had not yet
figured out the value behind what is now celebrated as "the digital
humanities." It is ironic that one of the most valuable digital
humanities sites in our field had to be created and supported with
little institutional support.

The greater reason, then, to celebrate Thomas' very impressive
achievement in the creation of *Île en île* and its growth and
maintenance over more than twenty years. The site was unique in its
creation at a time when developing such a site required more technical
knowledge and effort than it would need today. But it was in imagining
at such an early date that the form most suited to the purpose of
bringing together literary and creative communities separated by
geographies and languages was through a digital route, that the future
would indeed be digital, that *Île en île* was so ahead of its time. One
should remember that *Île en île* was launched in the same year as the
founding of Google, with the internet perhaps not in its infancy, but
certainly still not in its prime. The technical work behind the site was
onerous and time consuming at the time and the site only grew in
technical complexity as new features were added. Yet the technological
challenges allowed for a creation of an archive of great importance and
practical utility---an invaluable tool for research and teaching whose
added value comes from the fact that it is not merely built on
collecting materials but went the huge extra step to create an archive
of new materials to capture what would otherwise would have been
ephemeral and lost to future generations.

Thomas' work ethic, his perseverance and satisfaction in discovering new
materials, securing yet another interview, adding a new writer to his
archive, is why the site he created is of such central value to present
and future scholars. Throughout the last year, as Thomas was preparing
the site to be archived---all done during a time when access to
collections was severely limited because of Covid---I have watched the
resolve with which Thomas has worked to assure that any remaining
questions on the site were answered, that every quotation was correct
and verified, that any materials that needed to be consulted were
accessed. In short, I saw him make sure that the materials archived were
as complete and accurate as they could be. For me, there is in this
commitment to exactitude and quality a measure of Thomas' true
dedication to his work as a scholar, translator, interviewer, and
archivist. These were qualities already there when we met some
thirty-five years ago. And the very same qualities for which I have
always been so glad to count him as a friend.
