*Laura Vargas Zuleta*

Abstract
========

In this essay I explore the connections between literature and historic
documents through a series of digital timelines that I created around
the novel *Hadriana dans tous mes rêves* (1988), by Haitian writer René
Depestre. As part of the In All My Dreams book club and art exposition
organized by Dr. Kaiama Glover and Dr. Laurent Dubois around *Hadriana*,
my digital project proposes an interactive way for readers to get a
sense of the novel by contrasting the events in the book with historical
ones. Focusing on the years the novel covers and those when Depestre
wrote it, I used the Digital Library of the Caribbean (dLOC) archive of
the Haitian newspaper *Le Nouvelliste* and selected a group of news
items about Jacmel (the city where the story is set) and Depestre
himself to include in my project. I selected the news items looking for
content that could help readers imagine the setting of *Hadriana*. The
novel, whose second movement includes its own fictional newspaper
article about Jacmel, is narrated in a fragmented, nonlinear way, but it
mentions the dates of major events. However, that nonlinearity made me
wonder how to build a timeline that enriches reading of the novel
instead of spoiling it. The final product consists of three timelines:
the first focuses on the novel; the second includes photos of the news
items I selected from *Le Nouvelliste* and links to the original archive
but has no information from the book; and the third combines the first
two so readers can compare and contrast both realities. This project
shows the possibilities that an archive such as dLOC offers for the
reading of literary works such as Depestre's.

What sort of digital tools can help nonacademic readers navigate a novel
whose temporal structure is fragmented and nonlinear? How can we build
such tools so they function as an invitation or provocation instead of
as a rigid, paternalistic guide in which information is provided to be
absorbed instead of explored? My digital project, "Hadriana in Context:
Timelines," was guided and shaped by these two questions that, to me,
were key to creating something useful and enriching for readers. As part
of the second version of the In All My Dreams book club around Haitian
writer René Depestre's novel *Hadriana dans tous me rêves* (*Hadriana in
All My Dreams*, 1988) organized by Dr. Kaiama Glover and Dr. Laurent
Dubois, I created a series of interactive digital timelines that
combined the events of the novel with real-life news articles covering
the place (Jacmel, a coastal city in southern Haiti) and time (mainly
the 1930s and 1940s) in which the novel is set, using contemporary
issues of the Haitian newspaper *Le Nouvelliste,* taken from the archive
of the Digital Library of the Caribbean (dLOC). This digital project,
which was included on the book club's website as part of its "Reader's
Guide," proposes an interactive way for readers to get a sense of
Depestre's novel by contrasting its events with historical ones, as well
as by guiding them to real-life newspaper archives from Haiti.[^1] By
introducing elements from a source outside the book, the timelines aim
to enrich readers' experience of *Hadriana*, not only by situating the
novel in its context but also by presenting it as part of Haitian
history. My project also seeks to give visibility to dLOC as a useful
database to explore the context of Caribbean literary works.

Depestre wrote *Hadriana dans tous mes rêves* in France, where he had
been living for many years. The novel tells the story of Hadriana, a
young white French woman living in Jacmel who is turned into a zombie on
the day of her wedding. The story is divided into three movements, as
Depestre calls them, that focus on different moments: the first is
narrated by Patrick, Hadriana's godbrother, and tells the events of her
wedding, apparent death, and disappearance from her grave; the second is
also mainly told by Patrick but takes place thirty-nine years later,
when he is working as a university professor in Kingston, Jamaica, and
includes different textual genres such as notes for a book, an imagined
interview, and a newspaper article about Jacmel; the third movement
takes us back to Jacmel to the day of the wedding. This movement is
narrated by the protagonist herself, Hadriana Siloé, and corrects
Patrick's version of the events. The presence of the newspaper article
in the second movement inspired me and Dr. Dubois to explore the archive
of *Le Nouvelliste* and conceptualize a project that combined both
sources, Depestre's novel and the newspaper issues.

*Hadriana*'s nonlinear structure, whose fragmentation is especially
evident in the second movement, is a challenge for readers to follow and
forces them to continually go back a few pages to rectify information or
try to put the pieces together. For this reason, the website of the In
All My Dreams book club includes a "Reader's Guide" with different tools
(a list of characters, a map of the novel's structure) to give readers a
better idea of how the novel is structured, who is who, and what is
happening in each movement. The novel's nonlinearity made me ask myself
what sort of project to build around it to contribute to the guide
without spoiling the reading process by overexplaining. This central
concern led the creation of "Hadriana in Context: Timelines."

When I began the research, I did not know what the final product would
be. However, Dr. Dubois, with whom I was working as a research
assistant, told me the organizers of the book club were trying to
attract more nonacademic participants for its second session, so he
suggested I create something with nonacademic readers in mind. The idea
was to offer participants materials that were not exclusively from the
novel so they could explore beyond the text and be able to connect
literature with elements of daily life, such as newspaper articles. The
materials did not have to be directly related to the novel; I was not
expected to find articles only on Depestre and *Hadriana* but rather to
unearth stories that could offer readers context on Jacmel's day-to-day
life as a way of seeing what Depestre might have had in mind when he
chose the space and time for Hadriana's story.

Given Depestre's inclusion of a fictional newspaper article on Jacmel as
part of the novel's second movement, and our choice to explore *Le
Nouvelliste*'s archive, I decided to start with the years 1945 and 1946,
when the author began his literary and political career and began to
gain renown in Haiti. For this first approach, I relied heavily on
dLOC's search tool, which allowed me to look for specific words in the
four or six pages that constituted each newspaper issue. I looked up
four main words: *Depestre*, *Ruche* (*La Ruche* was Depestre's Marxist
newspaper), *Carnaval* (Hadriana's wedding, death, and funeral take
place in the middle of Carnival), and *Jacmel*. I found many news items
on Jacmel's infrastructure being damaged by heavy rain or about
politicians' visits to the city, but not a single word about *La Ruche*
or Jacmel's Carnival, and only two items on René Depestre: one from
August 1946 titled "René Depestre malade \[René Depestre Ill\]," which
wished the writer a speedy recovery, and another from October of the
same year, "Départ de M. René Depestre \[Departure of M. René
Depestre\]," announcing that he was leaving to study in France.

After reviewing all the *Nouvelliste* issues available for 1946, we
decided it was time to go back a few years and explore from 1937, the
year of Hadriana's wedding and all the main events in the novel's first
movement. With the change of decade came a change in search keywords.
Since Depestre would not have been in the news back then, I stopped
searching for his name or *La Ruche*'s but kept looking for news items,
columns, and articles about Jacmel. Because of the importance of
Jacmel's natural environment at the end of *Hadriana*'s third movement,
I also added more keywords to my search to see what sort of information
I could find on environmental issues, words like *arbre* (tree),
*reboisement* (reforestation), *déboisement* (deforestation), *plantes*
(plants), *planter* (to plant), and so on. However, not all issues of
*Le Nouvelliste* from the 1930s had the word search tool I had been
using before, so in many cases I had to go through all the pages looking
for clues of what I was searching for. This meant I had to devote more
time per issue, but it also led me to a discovery we had not
anticipated: a reforestation program supported by the state.

The Haitian president of the time, Sténio Vincent, started the program
in 1937. It included brigades to plant trees in deforested areas, as
well as fines for those who cut trees without planting new ones to
replace them. Most 1937 issues of *Le Nouvelliste* included an ad
consisting of a short text detailing the importance of plants,
specifically of reforestation, for agriculture and the Haitian economy.
These announcements notified readers of who would be participating in
the program and reminded them of the importance of this issue for their
security and that of their children. Although Depestre's novel does not
delve into the issue of deforestation, natural environments, especially
around Jacmel, are a key element in the text. This is particularly
evident at the beginning of the first movement when Patrick is
describing the area of Jacmel, and at the end of the third movement when
Hadriana recounts how she fled her captors and left Haiti.[^2] In the
latter passage, Hadriana presents nature as a sort of ally that protects
her better than the residents of Jacmel, so I continued searching for
articles on Sténio Vincent's program.

Besides the advertisements, the newspaper also published articles about
the program, like "S.E. Sténio et le problème du reboisement \[H.E. (His
Excellency) Sténio and the Problem of Reforestation\],"[^3] found on the
first page of the 17 July 1937 issue, in which the newspaper
congratulates the president on the amazing job being done thanks to the
program; "Le reboisement \[Reforestation\],"[^4] found on the first page
of the 26 July 1937 issue, in which the newspaper gives some more
information about how the program works and mentions Jacmel at the end
as one of the regions where the program is at work; "Contraventions au
décret sur le reboisement \[Violations of the Reforestation
Decree\],"[^5] a news item from the 30 April 1938 issue reporting that
ninety-one individuals were tried for deforestation and sixty of them
convicted; or "Reboisez vos terres \[Reforest your land\],"[^6] found on
the first page of the 26 June 1938 issue, about the ceremony
inaugurating the reforestation of mountains in Kenscoff. News of the
reforestation program stops after 1938, so articles on this initiative
only cover two years, but during 1937 and 1938 it is present in most
issues of the newspaper, from news items to longer ones explaining to
readers the new policies regarding the planting and cutting of trees in
Haiti.

Apart from Sténio Vincent's reforestation campaign, I also found
interesting news items on Jacmel from the years of 1937 and 1938 and
even through 1941. The nature of the news was extremely diverse, from
reporting on a general blackout[^7] in the commune to the mysterious
disappearance of the Jacmel orchestra's instruments.[^8] One of the
longest pieces I found in the archive was a column published in several
September 1938 issues titled "Voyage autour de Jacmel \[Trip around
Jacmel\]" and signed by "J.B." (figure 1).[^9] This column is
reminiscent of the "Lettre de Jacmel" in Depestre's novel (figure 2), a
series Patrick tells us was published by the Paris newspaper *Le Monde*
in April 1972 (113--17).

{% include image.html

img="jacmel-nouvelliste.jpg"

title="Voyage autour de Jacmel"

caption="Column on Jacmel from September 1938 on the *Nouvelliste*
timeline" %}

{% include image.html

img="jacmel-monde.jpg"

title="Lettre de Jacmel"

caption="Fictional column on Jacmel from April 1972 on the *Hadriana*
timeline" %}

**Figure 1**. Column from September 1938 on the *Nouvelliste* timeline.

**Figure 2.** Fictional column on Jacmel from April 1972 on the
*Hadriana* timeline.

I recorded all my findings in a series of Excel documents. Here I
included the link from dLOC where I had found them, the issue number and
the date when it was published, the page, the section (when necessary),
the title, and a brief summary of what it said. Within the documents, I
created different categories: Jacmel, Depestre, deforestation, and so
on. I also made separate documents for each six-month period I covered
in my research so the tables would be easier to manage: especially for
the "Jacmel" category, I was finding more materials per year than could
fit easily in a single document. At that time, I was focused not on
finding articles or items directly related to events or themes of the
novel but on creating a database of all materials that matched my
keywords or topics, in order to compile a vast list from which to choose
articles at a later point.

Having covered most of *Le Nouvelliste* issues from 1937 to 1946, I had
enough materials about Jacmel, Depestre, and life in Haiti to decide
what kind of project was best for the "Reader's Guide." We discussed the
idea of creating an inviting digital object that would direct people to
the dLOC database that I had been using, so they could find more
intriguing content and materials. After giving it some thought, I came
up with the idea of a timeline that would allow readers to contrast
events in the book with news items from *Le Nouvelliste*. It occurred to
me that the guide on the website, which at that point consisted mainly
of text, needed a visual and interactive tool that people could use at
their own pace, and in the order they chose, without adding much more
reading to the equation.

Another advantage of the combined timeline was that readers could return
to it before, during, and even after reading *Hadriana*; because it
contained information beyond Depestre's novel, the timeline would not
become obsolete after reading concluded*.* I also thought it would be an
engaging and clear way of visualizing the story in its historical
context, and thus encourage users to interact with a literary text as a
complex cultural object that could be put in dialogue with other sorts
of sources. However, because one of the novel's structural features is
its nonlinearity, I had to make visible that structure, that way of
conceiving of time, without erasing the fragmentary element. If the
novel was refusing linearity in its presentation of events, would a
timeline not achieve the exact opposite? It was clear to me that I
needed to design my tool so that linearity would not act as a
straitjacket, an obligated path that all users had to walk. Moreover,
paradoxically, I needed my project to invite readers to keep
transgressing linear time even though I was offering them a timeline.

The objective of the project was not to educate readers on the main
events in Haitian history (for which they could find multiple tools on
the internet) but to provide a window on Jacmel life that would give
non-Haitian readers a grasp of the story's context. With this goal in
mind, I had to choose from the materials I had collected in my research
those that the book club participants would find interesting and even
fun. Again, I was aiming to get users to explore more of what dLOC had
to offer to complement their experience of Depestre's novel, not to
lecture them on its context and facts. I hoped for my project to be one
that curated unique items, things that could not be found in a quick
Wikipedia or Google search, thus providing users with a new window
through which to look at the text.

Taking this into account, I went back to the documents where I had
recorded my findings and made a list of candidates for the timelines:
news on missing objects, machete fights, cultural happenings, or the
agriculture of the region, as well as some news items on the
reforestation program and René Depestre himself. The first list of
potential objects consisted of forty items, most of them news items and
articles of which I had taken screenshots because I found them
particularly interesting for the book club even before I knew I would
use them for a timeline. Forty was a big number, and I thought it could
make the timeline overwhelming for its users and spoil its purpose of
inviting readers to explore the original archive, so I knew I had to
make my list shorter. However, since I was not sure how many events from
Depestre's novel I was going to be able to locate chronologically, I
could not decide how many candidates to eliminate.

The next step was to reread the novel and take note of all the events
that included a specific date or for which Depestre had mentioned at
least the month in which an event took place. I was surprised to
discover that the author had been fairly clear on dates for most of the
novel's main events, and a detailed timeline could be made without
difficulty. At the end I had fifteen dates from the novel, with only
one, January 1918, going further in the past than my own findings from
*Le Nouvelliste.* All of the events after 1946, the last year I included
in my research, were set not in Haiti but in Europe and Jamaica, so it
seemed that both chronologies fit together for the project I had in
mind, to the point that Patrick's and Depestre's arrivals in Paris from
Haiti happened in 1946 with only a few months' difference (figure 3).

{% include image.html

img="patrick-paris.jpg"

title="Patrick and Depestre arrive in Paris in 1946"

caption="Patrick's arrival in Paris in the combined timeline. At the
bottom it is possible to see Depestre's arrival, just a few months
earlier" %}

**Figure 3***.* Patrick's arrival in Paris in the combined timeline. At
the bottom one can see Depestre's arrival, just a few months earlier.

It was telling that even though the dates from the novel covered most of
the twentieth century (1918--77), the biggest concentration of events
was in the late 1930s, reminding us that Patrick's chronology was
selective, that he and I both were creating a narrative through the
events he chose. In his narrative he was building not the history of
Jacmel but the history of Jacmel through Hadriana. I say "Patrick's
chronology" because Hadriana's narrative does not include precise dates
the way Patrick's does. She seems more focused on getting the facts
right, on stating her position and correcting what has been said before
*about her* and about *her experience* of all that happened *to her*.
The only date she mentions is the one of her arrival in Jamaica, in
February 1938, possibly because this is the date she started her new
life, away from the expectations of the Jacmel community.

In the first two movements, Patrick builds a narrative that one could
easily be tricked into reading as objective and rigorous, especially
since he constantly contests other versions (32) seems to study (takes
notes, reads about zombification, includes other sources) the case of
Jacmel and Hadriana in the second movement. His narrative creates the
illusion that he is somehow destined to know more than others, to tell
Hadriana's story and, thereby, to understand the events that led to her
disappearance. However, Hadriana's later retelling of the story forces
us readers to look back at Patrick's narrative with a fresh perspective
and see how subjective it really was. I did not want to miss this in the
final product of my project, even though the dates I was including were
mainly sourced from Patrick's narrative. I started looking for ways to
play with my own narrative, my own chronology, so users were also pushed
to go back and look anew at the same items they saw at the beginning of
each timeline.

After rereading *Hadriana* and visualizing a clear chronology of the
novel, I came back to my list of candidate items from *Le Nouvelliste*
and discarded eight that seemed less helpful for the project either
because they did not include much information or because they were
repetitive (meaning I had other similar items from other moments). This
was easy to do because my goal was not to present an exhaustive list of
each time Jacmel or Depestre were in the newspaper but rather to enrich
other people's reading of *Hadriana* and offer a new space to explore
its context.

We reached out to Dr. Eliza Bourque Dandridge, who guided us in
selecting the best tool for creation of the timeline. Dr. Dandridge
suggested that I use Northwestern University\'s Knight Lab since it was
easy to manage: the lab offers a template in a Excel document that one
can fill with the information one wants in the digital timeline and
include images, change colors and fonts, and so on.[^10] Embedding the
final product on a website was very simple. One of the reasons why I
chose Knight Lab was that it allowed users to interact with the
timelines so they could decide how to navigate the information. Dr.
Dandridge and I also discussed my ideas on how to proceed. I was worried
the timeline would include too much key information for those who were
about to read or still reading the novel; in other words, I did not want
to give away "spoilers," which would have defeated the purpose of the
project. Given that Depestre's novel is not linear in its chronology, it
was impossible for readers to control the tool in a way that only gave
them events from the pages they had read, so my whole set of dates
constituted a field plagued with spoilers. We agreed that we needed to
offer a set of three timelines: one exclusively for the materials from
*Le Nouvelliste* for those interested in exploring the historical
context without spoilers, one exclusively for *Hadriana*, and one that
combined the two. Both the *Hadriana* timeline and the combined timeline
would have a spoiler alert at the beginning.

Because it was the shorter and simpler one, I decided to start with the
*Hadriana* timeline while I familiarized myself with the tool I was
using. It took a few tries, but when I managed to use it right it was
exactly what I had in mind: the timeline allowed users to navigate the
chronologies at their pace and in the order they preferred: in the
center of the screen it showed one of the events with the information
and images users had chosen for it; two arrows, one on each side, would
allow users to go back and forth; and, at the bottom, users could skip
to random events by clicking on them on a small timeline. The fact that
the timelines could be navigated in many ways and not exclusively in
chronological order fit perfectly with Depestre's nonlinear structure
and seemed more inviting for users, a better way to make them feel
engaged with the materials. This also helped my other objective: if
users could explore events in different orders, this would encourage
looking at them from different perspectives to see how they built
different sorts of narratives depending on how the timelines were used.
There was only one thing that bothered me: my *Hadriana* timeline needed
a visual element: I only had text for it and none of the Knight Lab's
editing options for font and color seemed to fill that lack.

While I thought of a solution for that issue, I begun to work on the
*Nouvelliste* timeline with its thirty-two items. For this one I did
have visual materials for each item since I had taken screenshots
directly from dLOC's archive. Even though all materials from the
newspaper were in French, it was easy to add a brief English summary of
the content of each item in the description. The entries for each date,
however, remained in French because I decided to use the original titles
from *Le Nouvelliste* as a way to break with English a little. I must
acknowledge here the absence of materials in Kreyòl in the project,
which is problematic given that it is the only language spoken by 100
percent of Haitians, while French is only spoken by a small minority,
usually belonging to the elite. Even if Depestre himself wrote in French
and the book club was carried out in English, I am aware that including
materials in Kreyòl and inviting readers to explore the language of the
Haitian people would make the project better. I hope to do this with the
timelines and enrich them for future versions of the book club.

After a few weeks, I had both separated timelines but still needed to
find some visual materials for the *Hadriana* version and then merge it
with the *Nouvelliste* one for the third combined timeline. The problem
with the visual factor of the *Hadriana* timeline was that I needed
fifteen images that I could legally use and that looked good together.
Depestre's novel does not include any illustrations, but the text is
written in a way that seems very visual, so I was convinced I could not
present the timeline as text only. After experimenting with different
ideas, like looking for images of different editions of the novel or
selecting random stock images that were related to each event, I went
back to my notes for inspiration (figure 4). All the notes I had taken
for the project, with the exception of the Excel documents, were
handwritten using an iPad and a digital notebook app called GoodNotes,
in which I could write as if on paper. Looking at my notes I realized
that I had the visual element for the timeline right in front of me, so
I began exploring ways to incorporate screenshots from it into the
timeline. With this last touch, the *Hadriana* timeline was finally
complete.

{% include image.html

img="timeline-hadriana.jpg"

title="*Hadriana*'s Timeline on the Reader's Guide"

caption="Beginning of the *Hadriana* timeline with an image of a section
of my original notes for the project" %}

**Figure 4**. Beginning of the *Hadriana* timeline with an image of a
section of my original notes for the project.

The last thing I had to do was merge the two timelines to create the
combined one. I first did this without altering the original format, but
when I finished it became clear that some differentiation was needed
between what belonged to *Le* *Nouvelliste*, or the real-life events,
and what came from the novel, or the fictional-life events. It took me a
week to resolve this problem since I wanted something that worked with
the screenshots of both sources and that was not distracting for users.
I experimented with different background colors and ended up with the
simplest solution: all items from the novel would appear with a dark
gray background that highlighted the colors of the images from my notes
(cream yellow, blue, black, and red), and all items from the newspaper
would have a white background so the black and white screenshots did not
look too dark. All these formatting elements, the images, the background
colors, helped a very long timeline (forty-seven entries or events in
total) to look not overwhelming or monotonous but rich, stimulating, and
easy to navigate. In this third timeline, I also included, as I did with
the *Nouvelliste* one, all the relevant reference information for each
item, including a link to dLOC's archive, so it would, again, encourage
the readers to go to the source and explore further. Another way of
doing this was that, for those items too long to fit in a single
screenshot, I only included a portion, so if someone wanted to read it
all they would have to go to the archive.

When the time came for the second version of the book club in February
2021, the timelines were already embedded in the "Reader's Guide" of the
website. I presented them to the group, explaining briefly how to
navigate them and where not to go in order to avoid spoilers. Many
participants noted the complexity that *Hadriana*'s nonlinear structure
represented for them. The guide we provided, including the timelines,
thus helped them to read the novel without feeling too frustrated or
confused. The reception of the timelines in the book club was good, and
we referenced them in some sessions while discussing the novel, but one
of the best results of the project was that they also are available for
future readers who browse the internet in search of information about
*Hadriana*. Even though I was thinking of a nonacademic audience when I
designed the timelines, I believe they also constitute a useful tool for
scholars revisiting the novel or searching for contextual information to
study *Hadriana*, since the timelines allow people to review the story's
main events and to access a rich database to approach literary texts
from the Caribbean: dLOC.

Looking back at the project, I would add or do a few elements
differently now. I have already mentioned the absence of materials in
Kreyòl in my project, but I must also acknowledge that the project would
benefit from a more diverse use of sources. As a non-Haitian scholar, I
failed to see that even though *Le Nouvelliste* provided enough material
in terms of the amount of items I was able to include in the timelines
and the broad time frame they covered, it is still a newspaper whose
main audience is the Haitian elite, that minority who can read French.
Just as Patrick was telling the story of Jacmel *through* what he knew
(or thought he knew) about Hadriana, I was presenting a narrative of the
city through the lens of *Le Nouvelliste,* in both cases the narratives
missed other perspectives. This could easily be solved by engaging in
conversations with Haitian scholars such as Jean-Ellie Giles, whose work
on the city of Jacmel and its influence in Haitian history could
dialogue especially well with the purposes of my project.

Users of the timelines could also be helped if I included sources that
present Jacmel through visual materials. Once again, dLOC proves to be
useful for this sort of project, since the digital library includes a
series of photos of the city from the 1930s,[^11] the decade of
Hadriana's wedding, which could add an extra layer to the timelines that
would not depend on language. This is something I look forward to doing
in the future, perhaps for a third version of the book club or just for
the website where the project can be found.

That said, the timelines proved to be an interesting feature for the
book club and allowed readers to engage with two crucial aspects of the
novel: chronology and context. Even if I played with the format to
separate items from both sources, the novel and the newspaper, the third
timeline transgressed the limits between the real and the fictional,
history and literature, inviting users to engage with both on the same
plane. By inserting the fictional events into the chronology of
real-life news and facts, users could construct their imaginary around
Jacmel and Haiti in a form of bricolage echoing Depestre's style. For
example, Depestre's own gesture from *Hadriana*'s second movement
involves playing with genres and including a newspaper column on Jacmel,
an imagined interview, and an anthropological study on zombification and
the zombie as a myth as part of Patrick's narration of his struggle to
survive his godsister's disappearance. This also resonated with
Depestre's retelling of the story through Hadriana's voice in the third
movement. Each of my timelines was a narrative with multiple navigation
options, even though the items did not change from one to the other. By
mixing both realities and choosing how to present each event, I was
offering a new way of telling the stories they encapsulated. For a
three-movement novel, I made three timelines, three attempts to locate
the novel's chronology and context so readers could approach it from
different angles. I hoped the timelines would convey the novel's
richness and multiple possibilities and help readers build their own
narratives of what they were reading. From this, I learned that these
sorts of projects are also new ways of telling stories and that, maybe,
this is what one should aim for in creating reading guides, no matter
the audience, in order to inspire readers to explore literary materials.

Laura Vargas Zuleta
===================

Laura Vargas Zuleta is a PhD student in the Romance Studies Department
at Duke University, where she is pursuing a Romance Track program with a
focus on contemporary hispanophone and francophone Caribbean literature.
She holds a BA in literature from the Universidad de los Andes in Bogotá
and an MA in Hispanic studies from Boston College.

[^1]: NOLA 2021, "Reader's Guide: A 'Map' of Hadriana," accessed 18
    January 2022,
    https://web.archive.org/web/20210520185531/https:/nola2021.iamdbookclub.com/a-map-of-hadriana-and-cast-of-characters/.

[^2]: René Depestre, *Hadriana dans tous mes rêves* (Paris: Gallimard,
    1988), 189; hereafter cited parenthetically in the text.

[^3]: "S. E. Sténio et le problème du reboisement," *Le Nouvelliste,* 17
    July 1937,
    [[https://www.dloc.com/UF00000081/03078?l=en]{.underline}](https://www.dloc.com/UF00000081/03078?l=en).

[^4]: "Le Reboisement," *Le Nouvelliste*, 26 July 1937,
    [[https://www.dloc.com/UF00000081/03085?l=en]{.underline}](https://www.dloc.com/UF00000081/03085?l=en).

[^5]: "Propos et faits divers: Contraventions au décret sur le
    reboisement," *Le Nouvelliste*, 30 April 1938,
    [[https://www.dloc.com/UF00000081/03324?l=en]{.underline}](https://www.dloc.com/UF00000081/03324?l=en).

[^6]: "Reboisez vos terres," *Le Nouvelliste*, 26 June 1938,
    [[https://www.dloc.com/UF00000081/03060?l=en]{.underline}](https://www.dloc.com/UF00000081/03060?l=en).

[^7]: "Propos et faits divers: Jacmel dans l'obscurité," *Le
    Nouvelliste*, 28 May 1938,
    [[https://www.dloc.com/UF00000081/03348?l=en]{.underline}](https://www.dloc.com/UF00000081/03348?l=en).

[^8]: "Propos et fait divers: Jacmel réclame son orchestre," *Le
    Nouvelliste*, 12 February 1938,
    [[https://www.dloc.com/UF00000081/03258?l=en]{.underline}](https://www.dloc.com/UF00000081/03258?l=en).

[^9]: For the first part of this column, see "Voyage autour de Jacmel,"
    *Le Nouvelliste*, 16 September 1938,
    [[https://www.dloc.com/UF00000081/03443?l=en]{.underline}](https://www.dloc.com/UF00000081/03443?l=en).

[^10]: Northwestern University, Knight Lab, home page, accessed 18
    January 2022,
    https://web.archive.org/web/20210519012906/https:/knightlab.northwestern.edu/.

[^11]: Digital Library of the Caribbean, search results for "jacmel\"
    anywhere and "Direction générale des Travaux Publics" as publisher,
    accessed 18 January 2022,
    https://dloc.com/results/brief/?t=jacmel,%22Direction+generale+des+travaux+publics%22&f=ZZ,PU.
