**The *Early Caribbean Digital Archive***

**Review**

The *[Early Caribbean Digital Archive](https://ecda.northeastern.edu/)*
is a compelling platform that engages with the pitfalls and
possibilities of uncovering alternative narratives within the
constrained space of the colonial historical record. Clearly
structured and aesthetically appealing, the site explicitly and
implicitly raises and grapples with crucial questions regarding
methodology and scholarly responsibility.

Perhaps the most important question the *Early Caribbean Digital
Archive* brings to the fore is whether—or to what extent—it is in fact
possible to “decolonize the colonial archive” via digital practices of
“remixing.” The site authors acknowledge at the outset that the
materials they feature “are primarily authored and published by
Europeans,” but they quickly promise to push against that coloniality by
foregrounding the narratives and experiences of nonwhite peoples in the
early Americas.[^1] The project’s stated goals are to go beyond
digitization and cataloging to provide both understanding of the
mechanisms of coloniality and opportunities for users to revise the
archive so to tell different, lesser-known stories.

Before getting to the matter of whether the site accomplishes these
objectives, it would be of interest for the site authors to reflect on a
number of grounding methodological questions, perhaps within the context
of the site’s “[About](https://ecda.northeastern.edu/home/about/)”
section. Notably, how do we think about those sources we know are
curated (selected, abridged, otherwise manipulated) by those in
power—sources whose very presence in the archive reflects choices made
by colonial subjects? Even more provocatively, what precisely is
“decolonizing” and (why) do we want to “decolonize the archive”—might
not our goal be instead to replace the archive with anticolonial and
antislavery methods? Why, also, as per Marisa Fuentes’s citation on the
site’s landing page, should the goal of such projects be to present an
“unbiased account?” Why should “coherency” be the goal? Might not the
goal of history be to acknowledge our biases—or even to have “the right”
biases (it might be argued, even, that the attempt to be neutral is to
operate from the position of the colonizer—or what Mary Louise Pratt has
called the “monarch-of-all-I-survey” position)?[^2] Such broad questions
are worth posing.

Also important, if “troubling” to consider, is the matter of how
to determine whether the “embedded narratives” might in fact have been
mere literary devices. In other words, given that the invented
interlocutor is a major trope of the Enlightenment, can we accept at
face value the idea that these enslaved narrators were real and not
characters invented to illustrate something the colonial author wanted
to prove? Foregrounding such opacities would do the work of responsibly
framing the project—acknowledging not just its potentialities and
affordances but also its constraints and open queries.

Given their compelling claim that digitization makes a difference, it
would be of great value for the site authors to do the work of
extraction for a greater number of the embedded slave narratives
discoverable among the documents included in their archive.
Clearly/prominently identifying/naming enslaved narrators as the
defining offering of the platform would go a long way to doing the work
of “decolonizing.” Indeed, this is an extremely intriguing and very
promising dimension of the site’s contributions.

The “About” section under the “Archive” tab might more accurately be
labeled “Using the ECDA” or “Suggestion for Use,” or something along
those lines.

The “Classroom” tab is fantastic. How, though, do the site authors
determine whether materials uploaded via the “Submit Materials” button
at the bottom of the page ultimately end up on the site? Are these
materials vetted by a committee and, if so, what kinds of criteria are
used? Clarity around these questions would be useful to include on the
site.

On the whole, *The Early Caribbean Digital Archive* offers a useful and
wide-ranging portal into significant materials from the plantation
Americas and, as important, proposes compelling paths for querying and
pushing against the constraints of the colonial record.

[^1]: “The Early Caribbean Digital Archive,”
    https://ecda.northeastern.edu/.

[^2]: Mary Louise Pratt, *Imperial Eyes: Travel Writing and
    Transculturation* (New York: Routledge, 1992), 201.
