---
layout: article
section: articles
title: 
  "long": "Xroads Praxis: Black Diasporic Technologies for Remaking the New World"
  "short": "Xroads Praxis"
doi: ""
author: 
- name: Jessica Marie Johnson  
  shortname: Johnson
  bio: >
  	Jessica Marie Johnson is a writer and historian of slavery at Johns
	Hopkins University. She is the author of *Practicing Freedom: Black
	Women, Intimacy, and Kinship in New Orleans Atlantic World* (University
	of Pennsylvania Press, forthcoming) and a co-editor, with Mark Anthony
	Neal, of "Black Code," a special issue of *The Black Scholar *(2017).
	Her work has appeared in *Slavery and Abolition*; *The Black Scholar*;
	*Meridians: Feminism, Race, and Transnationalism*; *American Quarterly*;
	*Social Text*; the *Journal of African American History*; the *William
	and Mary Quarterly*; *Debates in the Digital Humanities*; *Forum
	Journal*; *Bitch Magazine*; *Black Perspectives* (AAIHS);
	*Somatosphere*; and *Post-Colonial Digital Humanities* (*DHPoco*). She
	tweets as @jmjafrx.

date: April 2019
issue: 3
order: 4
abstract: >
	This essay offers "xroads praxis" as a black diasporic technology for exploring what digital and analog landscapes hide and reveal. Invoking the crossroads, where deals are made and past meets present, a xroads praxis centers black humanity on the other side of the trick/tragedy—the Middle Passage, after the hurricane, deep in the slave ship. At the crossroads, the things we make (hashtags, tweets, Instagram posts, multimedia exhibits, archives, and blogs) may remain or they may disappear, may break or may be stolen/archived/corrupted, even without our permission. But they haunt, they scream, and they remain accountable to the living and lived. Moving through the black space on the map of Puerto Rico after Hurricane María to the haunting compositions created by jazz saxophonist Matana Roberts, this essay engages, in atmospheric, musical, and visual form, with the ways blackness challenges technological conventions—and technology’s failure to contend with slavery’s past and empire’s present—as its own technology, one powerful enough to remake the New World.
language: en
---

{% include epigraph.html
    quote = "Memory ... dulls the lash/for the master, sharpens it for the slave."
    citation = 'Natasha Tretheway, "Native Guard."'
%}


A dyad of satellite images of Puerto Rico at night were taken by the
National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration and sent out as a tweet.
The top image was taken at 2:00 a.m. on 24 July 2017. The bottom image
was taken at 2:00 a.m. on 25 September 2017. Although only months apart,
the contrast between the two is stark. The second image was taken five
days after Hurricane María made landfall in Puerto Rico.

{% include image.html
    img="issue03/johnson-a.png"
    title="Suomi Puerto Rico 24 September 2017"
    caption="Suomi satellite images of Puerto Rico on 24 July 2017 and
    24 September 2017. Image credit\: NOAA National Environmental
    Satellite, Data, and Information Service (NESDIS)."
    url="https://twitter.com/NOAASatellitePA/status/912368981784309760" 
%}

Pictured here, Puerto Rico is a dark mass, spots of light like stars
plotting colonial and indigenous space and time. Ghostly white dots
congeal around the cities of San Juan and Poncé, named after noble
Spanish bloodlines and conquerors. To a lesser extent, the same pattern
outlines the cities of Mayaguëz and Arecibo, whose names, in contrast,
index ancient caciques and indigenous genealogies. Once upon a time a
slaveholding colony, San Juan was filled with traders who met merchant
ships from across the Americas, exchanging human cargo for plantation
and farm products harvested elsewhere on the island. Poncé and Mayaguëz
were lands of sugar and slavery, but even smaller municipalities like
Arecibo were dotted by farms and bore witness to anticolonial resistance
waged by peasants and small landowners as well as enslaved and free
laborers of African and Native descent.[^1] Before emancipation in 1873,
enslaved women, children, and men of African descent would have filled
those spaces and the other black, black spaces on the map. Some Africans
would have absconded as maroons to those darkened mountains together in
search of fugitive *palenques*. Others may have arrived in the interior,
having been kidnapped from plantation districts and sold to cash-poor
farmers who could not afford the prices in specie being demanded by
international slave-trading merchants.

Human catastrophe leaves a mark, a black spot in time and space. On 20
September 2017, when Hurricane María made landfall on the island, the
site of Christopher Columbus’s second so-called discovery and the
birthplace of the New World, it swept bridges off their supports, tore
leaves off the trees in the rainforest, drove wildlife into migration or
into hiding. The electrical grid, already a battered, colonial
infrastructure, fell to pieces, as did the water and sewage systems and
other public services. San Juan, the capital, *el santo*, the herald of
Spanish empire, bowed and flailed in Guabancex’s onslaught until,
finally, darkness reigned.[^2]

But blackness in the blackened spaces hit hardest by Hurricane María
disappeared in the aftermath. In Carolina and Loíza, towns in the
constellation near San Juan, that some one-fifth to three-quarters of
the population (respectively) described itself as of African descent
went without mention in the aftermath of the storm. In Poncé, which did
not restore electricity to all its residents until August 2018—328 days
after the storm—between 10 and 20 percent described themselves as
black.[^3] Indigenous spaces suffered similar disappearances. Utuado,
which for generations claimed indigenous patrimony on the island and is
the home of Caguana Indigenous Ceremonial Park, barely rated a mention
in mainstream news generated by the storm. Nor does Utuado, a region
where even before the storm running water and electricity were
privileges not rights, appear in the satellite image. "Memory," poet
Natasha Trethaway writes, "dulls the lash / for the master, sharpens it
for the slave."[^4] And few cared to remember that the chronic
dispossession faced by black and indigenous spaces on the island would
leave them most vulnerable and most in need after the storm.[^5]

At the same time, somatic blackness and nonwhiteness saturated screens
and devices as images of Puerto Ricans suffering under palm trees
appeared on televisions and computers, spread by mainstream media.
Blackness appeared in other ways as well, somewhere underneath the
biopolitical and ocular. Tapping into a lexicon of Caribbean women,
children, and men as both childlike and bestial, President Donald Trump
derisively threw paper towels at relief workers on his visit to the
island, treating them in the words of one observer, "like dogs."[^6] On
the island itself, the federal and local police-military-surveillance
apparatus that preoccupied itself with the war on drugs justified
harassment of black islanders, shifted after the storm. Police wasted no
time implementing and enforcing a curfew, including breaking up
gathering spaces of dance and play—the kind that inevitably erupt when
there is one working generator in a neighborhood and the night is long,
hot, and dark. And in breaking news about the storm’s impact, social
media queries circulated desperately and especially among Puerto Ricans
in the United States searching for incommunicado kin; blackness appeared
in the loss and mourning of a diaspora for its people—for those lost
beneath the sea.

Like Hurricane Katrina, Hurricane María was a natural disaster only to
the extent that the Caribbean is no stranger to storms. The indigenous
population of Puerto Rico had even named a deity after the hurricane:
Guabancex, a femme supernatural entity of such power and importance that
she was accompanied by two lesser deities as her heralds and commanders.
However, ecological damage wrought by human interference has caused a
climate catastrophe so disruptive that 2017 became the first hurricane
season on record to witness the formation of three hurricanes at
Category 3 or higher. Failure to invest in environmental resources or
basic infrastructure exacerbated the impact of the storm upon landfall.
And as a result of focused neglect at all levels of governance,
including by the Federal Emergency Management Agency, the thirty-four
people killed in the storm itself would be joined by over one thousand
others as life-support systems failed, refrigerators used to store
medical necessities like insulin and baby formula grew warm, and
residents resorted to suicide to secure relief from trauma.[^7]
Guabancex, when she "grows angry," writes Fray Ramon Pané, "moves the
wind and water and tears down the houses and uproots the trees."[^8]

The black space on the map of Puerto Rico after the storm offers more
than a referendum on an environmental event. It surfaces, in atmospheric
and visual form, our failure to contend with slavery’s past and empire’s
present. This failure erupted in full hurricane force across the
Caribbean as the archipelago paid the price of generations of extractive
violence. And yet blackness as density of life is still there.
Illuminated or not, it occupies the dark swathes on the map; it
continues to refuse and be refused illumination. It is the null value in
all our humanities. At the crossroads somewhere between state-sanctioned
death and dances on generators, there is a black diasporic technology
that charts a path through the dark. Black diasporic theorists have been
building this technology over a decade of fantastic scholarship. Black
diasporic artists such as Matana Roberts have embodied the experience of
this technology in ethereal music that screams with ghosts. Exploring
what digital and analog landscapes hide and reveal, seeing them in their
fullness after the storm of 1441/1492, finding black space on the map
that does not conclude in black death, requires exploring with a xroads
praxis.[^9]

## Part 1. /*Black*/ Code 

Confronting the Suomi image of black space in Puerto Rico brings to mind
another image. In 2012, digital humanist Ben Schmidt created a data
visualization of all the voyages in the US Maury collection. The Maury
collection, eighty-eight microfilmed reels of historical ships’ weather
logs produced between 1784 and 1863, became part of the International
Comprehensive Ocean-Atmosphere Data Set in 2002. Schmidt’s image tracks
all the voyages in black, plotted on a white background of vacated of
land masses.

{% include image.html
    img="issue03/johnson-b.png"
    title="Schmidt ICOADS US Maury"
    caption="All voyages from the ICOADS US Maury collection. Ships tracks
    in black, plotted on a white background, show the outlines of the
    continents and the predominant tracks on the trade winds. Created by Ben
    Schmidt, 2012."
    url="http://sappingattention.blogspot.com/2012/11/reading-digital-sources-case-study-in.html"
%}

Schmidt sought to visualize the wind currents that swept caravans of
wood and flesh back and forth across the ocean. Struck by this image,
scholar Marisa Parham troubled this reflection. "Air is energy," she
writes. "When away from the sea we seldom think about such things
because we seldom connect breeze to wind to storm, until we must
remember what happens when it fuels itself: gales, hurricanes, typhoons,
tornadoes."[^10]

{% include image.html
    img="issue03/johnson-c.png"
    title="Johnson NOAA 20sep17\_maria\_geocolor hurricane"
    caption="NOAA GOES-16 satellite image of the eye of Hurricane María
    over Puerto Rico, 20 September 2017."
    url="https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=ezQxonSFCaU" 
%}

In both the image of a darkened Puerto Rico and that of dark lines of
ships crossing the ocean in the nineteenth century, the viewer faces a
dilemma. On the one hand, the confrontation is with the blackened space
made possible through the use of technology. On the other, the viewer
contends with the use of white space that has been emptied of life, even
as it was epistemologically called in to do the work of outlining the
New World. Obliterated are the bound and blackened bodies that occupy,
produce, and reproduce in the wake of colonial intervention. In the
words of Christina Sharpe, on wake work, "In the wake, the past that is
not past reappears, always, to rupture the present."[^11] Keeping the
past and present in hand, invoking the wake means visualizing the wave
pattern left behind in the wake of ships passing. It means visualizing
many crossings and crossroads—ships bearing dark-skinned refugees forced
to flee their homes in one direction, ships from the global North
bringing aid to a global South made disastrous by globalization and
neoliberal devastation in the other. Use of the wake also gestures to
the vernacular of "wokeness," a common twenty-first-century black
diasporic invocation of political awareness of injustice. It means
visualizing all of these as true all at once.

Because these bodies and processes do not appear, whether in the data
sets or seen from space, it becomes difficult to place these images in
relation, but in so many ways they are. Some twenty-seven thousand
enslaved people traveled on ships riding those currents, arriving as
early as 1520 and as late as 1859. Nearly a century ago, the Jones Act,
in true mercantilist-colonialist form, limited shipping to the island of
Puerto Rico to US ships.[^12] Despite calls by elected officials across
the political spectrum to suspend the act and allow aid to reach
survivors of Hurricane María by any means necessary, conversations
abounded on the act for days before the resident waived it. Even these
facts, as residue of slave ship manifests and government decrees, do not
evidence the undocumented ships and shipping, lives and communities,
linked by wind and water to the island.[^13]

As a result, visibility offers little relief. On the other side of
disappearing, for black and blackened subjects, lies the overindexed,
overexposed voyeurism that accompanies images of death and destruction
in places that look like Puerto Rico (or Haiti, Cuba, Brazil, and
beyond). The West’s tropic and trope-ic desire for blackened flesh fed
European men for years through the writings of Moreau de St. Mery,
Edward Long, Agostino Brunias, Jean-Baptiste Labat, John Stedman, and
Michel Adanson, to name a few. Moving at the speed of the digital,
mainstream media, non-governmental organizations, police and military
units, fiction and travel writers continue to render the islands, towns,
and regions of the global South spaces of paradise and tourism, illicit
desires and illegal release. In other words, visualizing blackness alone
does its own damage to black humanity. It coughed up former president
George W. H. Bush’s lurid laughter in a September 2005 press conference
on Hurricane Katrina, when he described New Orleans as a town where he
used "to enjoy myself, occasionally too much." It excreted from
President Trump’s statement that Haitian and African migrants to the
United States were coming from "shithole countries." These imperial
discharges, tinged in white masculine voyeurism, claim to visualize
blackness. But these men consume only black bodies, not black life.

In other words, illuminating digital lanterns with more and more data
does not provide new answers. As scholar Simone Browne has explored, is
a black person with a lantern a cyborg? In 1712, two dozen enslaved
Africans armed themselves and gathered in the city of New York.
Buildings went up in flames. The mathematics of black resistance during
the period of slavery often added up to this—a handful of white lives
lost, a morass of black life extinguished, and a series of punitive
legal and surveillance measures instituted. New York’s slave revolt
proved no exception. Ten white residents lost their lives. In
retaliation, mobs attacked enslaved and free black residents of the
town. Police arrested some seventy, others were assaulted in the deluge.
Twenty-three were killed. Of those arrested, twenty-five were sentenced
to death. In March 1713, in the wake of the event, officials instituted
the Lantern Laws: no people of African descent, free or slave, or those
described as "Indians," over the age of fourteen could be out at night
without a light, a lantern, or torch of some kind, unless in the company
of a white person. The punishment was forty lashes.[^14]

Laws like these encoded ocularity, visuality, illumination, and data
collection as tools of power over black humanity for generations. The
New York Lantern Laws demanded a mechanization of black being. A forced
illumination. An exposure and an outing. In the presumed visibility cast
by the lantern’s glow, slaveowners received a false sense of safety and
a skewed biometric of what people of African descent look like in the
dark. Blackness indexed by empire loads deviance/death/devastation.
Where the code ignores blackness, it allows white space on the map to do
the work of analysis. But where the code reveals blackness, it does so
at the risk of replicating systems of consumption and restraint.

In "Black Code Studies," a special issue of *The Black Scholar*, Lauren
Cramer and Alessandra Raengo write:

> To parse the issue of "black codes," it may be worth distinguishing
> between the black codes understood as the antiblack assemblages that
> have already been written and continue to define encounters with
> blackness, and the careful iterative work of blackness writing its own
> commands within its existing constraints, which we will call "black
> coding."[^15]

Taking Cramer and Raengo’s distinction seriously, Lantern Laws, the
Jones Act, Immigration and Customs Enforcement, the prison warden, the
plantation overseer, or the barracoon provide containers for code work,
but the wake work of attending to black life precedes and proceeds in
the thick of these.

Africans, by their very existence and through outright resistance and
transgression, defied the commodification they had been put to. Those
writing slave codes passed the laws for the purpose of constructing and
maintaining slavery. Africans had their own idea of how their lives
should matter and to whom they were accountable. Where black life
remained in the shadow, where slaves gathered out of sight to plot their
next act of life and resistance, black life transgressed slave codes and
exceeded the register. Even in plain sight, black people who carried
their own lanterns were not simply following the rules. They were
masking, and the light was their mask.

## Part 2. \#BlackTheory

Excavating black life from the crossroads of death and forced
illumination is an ethical project. Histories of slavery offer one
corrective and a vantage point for a new kind of accountability. Studies
of slavery have been suffused with the drive for data. Historians of
slavery were some of the first to take up computational and digital
forms in an attempt to organize knowledge about bondage, the plantation
complex, and the structure of African-descended life in the New World.
In 1998, David Eltis and David Richardson’s *Trans-Atlantic Slave Trade
Database*, which launched a database containing almost thirty thousand
Atlantic slave trade voyages, was just one of several databases and
digital projects that emerged at the beginning of this century. In 2000,
Gwendolyn Midlo Hall, partnering with Paul Lachance and Virginia Meacham
Gould, among others, launched the *Afro-Louisiana History and Genealogy*
database. A more recent spate of interest in slavery and the digital
humanities led to the creation of new database projects. In 2012,
*Enslaved: People of the Historic Slave Trade* (formerly the *Slave
Biographies Database*), a project led by Walter Hawthorne and Dean
Rehberger, was launched by MATRIX: The Center for Digital Humanities and
Social Sciences at Michigan State University. In 2015, Henry Lovejoy led
a team in databasing records of "Liberated Africans" or Africans
captured from slave ships by the British after 1808. In 2016, *Freedom
on the Move*, a project compiling runaway slave ads and led by Edward
Baptist and William C. Block, with team members Vanessa Holden, Mary
Niall Mitchell, Joshua Rothman, and more, launched at Cornell
University. In 2018, the *Trans-Atlantic Slave Voyages Database* project
partnered with the *Inter-American Slave Trade Database* project,
expanding the number of searchable slave trade voyages into the
Americas. These projects apply historical methods and digital tools to
the explication of black life under bondage. They each offer rich
archives of data on black life under slavery and place numbers, graphs,
tables, and, in some instances, written texts into a digital realm where
users can access them without traveling to an archive or sitting in a
university classroom.

Black studies scholars, creatives, and activists have also modeled
explicit ways of attending to black humanity in the face of illuminating
technology.[^16] In 2000, Abdul Alkhalimat launched eBlackStudies with
the goal of bringing black studies, history, and issues of social
justice, particularly around the Black Power movement, into the digital
realm. In 2005, Howard Dodson and Sylviane Diouf completed work on a
massive digital project and presence hosted at the Schomburg Center for
Research in Black Culture titled *In Motion: The African American
Migration Experience*. Scholars such as Alondra Nelson, Moya Bailey,
Aleia Brown, and Joshua Crutchfield created digital communities that
centered blackness and included creatives and thought producers invested
in radical black futures and social justice, including attending to
trans\* and queer of color livelihoods. Others, such as Kim Gallon,
Angel David Nieves, Nishani Frazier, and Christy Hyman, have created
productive communities of digital humanities scholars invested in black
studies within the academy but attuned to the needs of those beyond the
Ivory Tower walls. These projects model the work black digital practice
makes possible. Black digital practice exceeds the academy, defying
boundaries between institution and community, form and function.

Excavating black life from the null value requires digital humanists to
understand the wide range of labor and creativity developed under the
heading "the digital." This work can be divided into at least four
forms:

- Digital Humanities: digital humanities within academia
- digital humanities: humanities work rendered digitally
- Digital Media: content created online
- digital practice: 💋💩😎🕷💦

The fourth form, digital practice, embraces the locus of hybrid,
playful, fluid, and meta possibilities that the digital creates and
problematizes. When hybrid practitioners engage in a *black* digital
practice, they expose the "queer, femme, fugitive, and radical"
possibilities of exceeding the field, breaking the CSV, and excavating
life from null values.[^17] Black digital practice builds on methods,
research ethics from theoretical frameworks, research methodologies, and
narrative structures (in short, \#BlackTheory) developed in Black
studies:


- blues epistemology \| Woods
- wake work \| Sharpe
- dark sousveillance \| Browne
- disruption poetics \| Morgan
- along the bias grain \| Fuentes
- hauntings \| Parham
- digital ethics \| Bailey
- Man1 and Man2 \| Wynter
- critical fabulation \| Hartman
- undercommons \| Harney and Moten
- …and more

What makes this rich and deep intellectual work so powerful is the way
it challenges the container of West and Western thought. \#BlackTheory
holds space for black life to be seen without the rancor of the voyeur,
appreciated without the demand for consumption. \#BlackTheory remakes
the archive, the human, the land itself. The intellectual projects
outlined above offer only a handful of the reading practices and
strategies necessary for intervening in the replication of black death
in our texts, on device screens, and in our everyday engagement with
academic work ("Digital Humanities"). They demand a practice of either
writing a "history of the present," as Marisa Fuentes and Saidiya
Hartman have espoused; reorganizing the past, as Jennifer Morgan and
Clyde Woods challenge; or creating community and art that transgresses,
as Moya Bailey, Stefano Harney, and Fred Moten have done.[^18]

Xroads praxis builds from and with this work. The digital humanities
exists in the wake of, and indexes an astronomical devaluation of, life.
Historians of slavery have a charge to produce truths about the course
of that devaluation. \#BlackTheory provides a language for translating
those truths into tools that remake the New World. A xroads praxis does
not demand that these goals intersect so much as that they challenge
users, creators, researchers, and teachers to move in multidimensional
time and space between our disciplines, communities, and institutions. A
xroads praxis requires us to learn from the black feminist
metaphysicians who, as Alexis Pauline Gumbs has related, "knew the body
would never be enough."[^19]

Xroads praxis evokes African diasporic intellectual and cultural
production, where the crossroads plays a central role in systems of
belief, cosmology, history, and social life. The crossroads is where,
according to diasporic Yoruba practices and beliefs, Ellegua or Papa
Legba grants the humble petitioner-practitioner access to spirit world.
The crossroads is linked, at times, to the Bakongo cosmogram, brought
with enslaved Africans to the Americas and representing four temporal
elements (dawn, noon, sunset, and midnight).[^20] It is the symbol found
at enslaved burial sites, carved into headstones and stones, or created
by enslaved and free blacks who left artifacts marking the points of the
cross at the four corners of their homes, as occurred in households from
Annapolis, Maryland, to the Bahamas. Throughout the eighteenth century
and into the nineteenth, before the institutionalization of prisons, the
crossroads was where those convicted of crimes were beaten, flogged, or
executed. After execution, the bodies of enslaved Africans; indigenous
women, children, and men; and poor whites were often left at crossroads
across the Caribbean and the South, displayed as lurid warning against
future infraction. At the crossroads, the devil met heroes and fools,
those in the wrong and those wronged. It was where Robert Johnson,
famous blues musician, made his deal with the devil, giving up his soul
for supernatural musical ability.

The crossroads continues to be of contemporary cultural relevance to
black people around the world. In hip-hop artist Common’s video for
"Black America, Again," a cosmogram was painted on the ground in front
of Gilmor Homes, Freddie Gray’s neighborhood. It was sculpted into the
floor of the Schomburg Center for Research in Black Culture by artist
Houston Conwill. It was where black women wait for justice in Kimberlé
Crenshaw’s theory of intersectionality. The crossroads is, in short,
where worlds come together and break apart, good and evil meet to make
deals, utter desperation meets otherworldly possibility, and spirit
meets flesh, where a choice must be made but perhaps not just yet. It is
the quiet before the beat drops.

By describing the collaboration between histories of slavery, the
digital humanities, and \#BlackTheory as requiring a xroads praxis, I am
demanding that scholars create data without losing affect, sensation,
and kinship as a framing for black life. Xroads praxis, for instance,
requires heated participation rooted in queerness, corporeality, and
desire. A xroads praxis self-consciously deals in dead things. Slave
manifests. Eighteenth-century testaments. Woodcut headers on ads for
recalcitrant runaways. Myspace posts. Livejournal graphics. 140
characters that disappear after ten days. In a xroads praxis, black life
is no longer invisible, although it may retain a redacted/unknown
quantity (X). It does not shy away from ephemerality. Instead of finding
limits in the absence, xroads praxis uses silence as Maroon code, allows
absconded figures, bodies in freedom, to offer a practicum on what, how,
and who our digital selves could be if we dared to embrace the sensorium
of hauntings left behind.

## Part 3. \*screams\*

{% include image.html
    img="issue03/johnson-audio-a.png"
    url="https://w.soundcloud.com/player/?url=https%3A//api.soundcloud.com/tracks/12068585&auto_play=false&show_user=true&visual=true"
    title="Pov Piti"
    caption="Pov Piti" %}

The second track of Matana Roberts’s *Coin Coin Chapter One: Gens de
couleur libres* is titled "Pov Piti." *Pov Piti* means "poor little one"
in Creole/Kreyol.[^21] "Pov Piti" is the title of a Creole folksong
found along the Gulf Coast, most often referring to a woman who has lost
the love of her life. Sometimes this woman is Lolotte; more often she is
Mamzelle Zizi. One of the most cited versions of Mamzelle Zizi may be
found in Louisiana Creole in Lyle Saxon’s 1945 *Gumbo Ya-Ya: Folk Tales
of Louisiana*. Saxon, chronicler of Louisiana and New Orleans folklore
and director of the Louisiana branch of the Federal Writers’ Project
from 1935 to 1943, printed his version as Mamzelle Zizi mourning her
lover. Jealous of her rival "who wears pretty clothes, which at that
time consisted of a brilliant madras tignon, imported from the Indies, a
gaily embroidered petticoat and earrings,"[^22] Mamzelle Zizi is
inconsolable:

> Pov’ piti Mamzelle Zizi!  
> Li gagnin bobo dans coeur!  
> Pov’ piti Mamzelle,  
> Li gaignin tristesse dans coeur!  
> 
> Calalou porté madras,  
> Li gagnin jupon brodé,  
> Li gagnin des belles allures,  
> Boucle d’oreilles en or tout pure.  
> 
> \[*Saxon's Translation*\]  
> (Poor lil’ Mamzelle Zizi!  
> She has a pain in her heart!  
> Poor lil’ Mamzelle Zizi,  
> She has sadness in her heart!)  
> 
> (Calalou wears madras,  
> She has an embroidered petticoat,  
> She has fine manners,  
> Earrings made of pure gold.)[^23]

In 1956, Adelaide van Wey sang an updated version, released by
Smithsonian Folkways under the title "Pauv’ Piti’ Mom’zelle Zizi." A
folk ballad meant to be sung on repeat, Van Wey’s intepretation had
three parts. Throughout the first two, Van Wey crooned throatily over a
piano and zither in a dark lament. Entering the third part, a half step,
a motif, quickened the pace, and the song shifted into dance tempo, Van
Wey singing lightly over Mamzelle Zizi’s pain.[^24] Pov piti has
inspired other, even more upbeat versions, from New Orleans jazz icon
Dr. John’s 2000 rendition of Mamzelle Zizi to the 2001 Orchestre
Bourbon’s rendition (led by Georges Fourcade) of Mamzelle Zizi and
recorded on the album *Le barde créole*.[^25]

The pov piti invoked by Matana Roberts is not a Creole dance tune.
Matana begins her version of this poor little girl’s story with silence,
broken gently by melodic piano chords. Behind the piano are choked,
coughing sounds, barely comprehensible, almost words. A wave of
synth-electronic sound with percussive accents begins to flood in. As it
does, the choking becomes a strangled stutter, the stutter transforms
into guttural cries, the cries become hoarse screams. The expression is
one of either extreme pain or extreme pleasure—or both, at the point
where the two coincide, a sonic expression of sensation at its most
extreme. Amber Musser, writing on race and masochism, theorizes
sensation as an analytic, as "both individual and impersonal; it
occupies a sphere of multiplicity without being tethered to
identity."[^26] Sensation, then, might be likened to raw data—except
sensation requires corporeality.

The body attached to these cries haunts their sound. In these first
twenty seconds of the song, it is impossible to ascribe a gender to the
body screaming. The cries are genderless and ungendered. Still, these
first two minutes of pov piti are marked by excess, the kind of excess
that invokes a necessary corporeality, bridging data (digital sound) and
sensation, suggestive but not illustrative (yet) of identity, intention,
or power. An excess of sound, an excess of desire, though it is unclear
whether that desire is to communicate, to cry for help, to continue the
torment or pleasure, or to simply be heard. The cries range from choked
gasps to garbled screams to inarticulate howls, loud, hoarse, and
coarse. The strain on the vocal chords, the throat, the voice, the
breath can be heard in the rasp, sigh, screech, and scrape of air
expelled from the body. The effort required to produce the screams is
tangible, even as words, in fact, *language itself*, remains
incomprehensible, lost to sensation. By the end of the second minute, it
seems every possible *human* iteration sounding out excess has been
achieved. The screams crescendo before descending into strangled rattles
of breath and half-formed croaks. As they do, a jazz saxophone begins to
play. A woman begins to speak, her words more clear. The woman is Matana
Roberts channeling her ancestress, Marie Thérèze "Coincoin" Metoyer.

In short, decisive sentences, Coin Coin, an enslaved woman of African
descent, offers testimony. "I am," Coin Coin, through Roberts, declares
over and over in sing-song. Coin Coin reflects. On her birth. On her
Catholic baptism. On her owner. On the death of her mother from yellow
fever. On being a slave, a "nigra," and therefore a "tool of the earth."
She repeats her name: "I am Coin Coin Coin Coin Coin Coin Coinnnn Coin,"
pronouncing it "Kwon Kwe." She muses in and on memory. Her narrative
devolves into a refrain: "I was only 16. I was only 16. There will never
be any pictures of me." As Coin Coin/Roberts speaks, in the spaces left
behind by, between, and synchronized with her words, a second/third
voice can be heard. Faint and femme, this ghost echoes everything
spoken, the same historical narrative, but in French.

Matana Roberts is a sound experimentalist, jazz saxophonist, composer
and improviser. Born on Chicago’s South Side, Roberts currently resides
in New York City. *Coin Coin: Gens de Couleurs Libres* is the first
chapter of her second project. The work is named after the formerly
enslaved woman of African descent named Marie Thérèze Coincoin Metoyer,
the founder of the Cane River Creoles community of Natchitoches,
Louisiana. Coin Coin was born a slave in 1742. Her owner, Louis
Juchereau de St. Denis, was the commandant of Natchitoches when the
rural outpost, some four miles north of New Orleans, was still under
French control. In 1767, a yellow fever epidemic decimated the outpost,
killing her mother and her owner. With St. Denis’s passing, ownership of
Coin Coin passed to his youngest daughter, who leased her to Claude
Thomas Pierre Metoyer. Coin Coin bore Metoyer several children, some of
whom Metoyer then freed. In 1778, Metoyer finally freed Coin Coin
herself. By this time, Louisiana had passed from French ownership to
Spanish. As a free woman of color, Coin Coin took advantage of Spanish
laws on land settlement to "improve" and eventually claim a plot of land
in the area of Natchitoches, which she farmed with her children and
slaves of her own. By 1810, Coin Coin had seven living sons with land,
cattle, and fifty-eight slaves among them. The only family in the area
to own more slaves than Coin Coin and her children were the white
Metoyers and their extended families.[^27]

Roberts, through family lore and history, learned she was descended from
one of these children. She speaks in interviews about growing up steeped
in references to her ancestress—including a grandfather who used to call
Roberts "Coin Coin" to tease. Constellation Records, Roberts’s label,
describes *Coin Coin* as "a multi-chapter work that combines conceptual
scoring (graphic notation, ‘chance’ strategies), storytelling and
historical narrative, performative theatre (personae, costume,
multi-media), and a deeply considered channeling of personal ancestry
and the ‘universal’ experience of Africans in America." Peter Margasak,
writing for National Public Radio, framed Coin Coin even further: "She
\[Roberts\] realized putting together fragments and snippets that
wouldn’t serve much purpose on their own, could result in something new
and meaningful."[^28]

Roberts calls her technique "panoramic sound quilting," but her act of
quilting moves well beyond the audiovisual experience to encompass and
involve her past, herself, her band, live audiences, the jazz community,
a digital community of lurkers, followers, rebloggers, and other sharers
and casual listener-viewers.[^29] When the first chapter, *Gens de
couleur libres*, was released in 2011, Roberts used archival material,
personal recollections, interviews with family members, and digital and
social media in a very dynamic fashion. She created the blog *In the
Midst of Memory* and posted clips from the album. When Roberts
eventually uploaded the full album on SoundCloud, she embedded links to
it on her blog, alongside historical information about Marie Thérèze
Coincoin Metoyer, New Orleans *gens de couleur libres*, slavery,
Louisiana, St. Louis, Chicago, and more. The liner notes for the
physical album included graphic notation Roberts created while making
the album; that blog no longer exists. The album remains available on
SoundCloud for free.

{% include image.html
    img="issue03/johnson-d.jpeg"
    title="Matana Roberts Notation"
    caption="Roberts’s graphic notation for Coin Coin." 
%}

In the process of composing *Mississippi Moonchile* and *River Run
Thee*, *Coin Coin* chapters 2 and 3, Roberts began using her Instagram
and Tumblr accounts (@steelkiltrose) to document and share her
cross-country journey around and throughout the United States.[^30]
While traveling and researching material for these and subsequent *Coin
Coin* chapters, Roberts shared her experience in the form of digital
photography and commentary, readily engaging with followers who joined
her virtually on her travels. *Mississippi Moonchile* was released in
2013, *River Runs Thee* in 2015. The Instagram and Tumblr accounts also
no longer exist. A short film, completed in 2010 in Montreal,
accompanied the release of *Mississippi Moonchile*. Directed by Radwan
Moumneh, it remains available on Vimeo and YouTube. In the grayscale
audiovisual romp through sound, text, and spectral movement, Roberts,
channeling Coin Coin, stands on empty streets in a white dress.
Saxophone in hand, she plays a song that at times the viewer cannot hear
over the screams of her archive. In *River Run Thee*, Roberts recites
from slave ship manifests, British Naval ship registers, and travel
narratives. In her accounting, the words of men like Captain G. L.
Sullivan, whose crew intercepted and seized slave ships after the formal
abolition of the trade in 1808, reverberate against a chanting
chorus.[^31]

Hauntings and crossings—the sound of them, the emotion in them, and the
sensation of them—dominate Matana’s project. In a 2015 interview,
Roberts described her process:

> I have a really big interest in the spirit world: spooks and the
> things we can’t necessarily see but feel. An exploration of ghosts and
> things of that nature. There was a period of my childhood where I
> tried to contact people on that plane and I stopped doing that as a
> teenager because I heard it can induce states of psychosis if you
> don’t have a proper guide. So I left that and I realised that music is
> my medium, my guide.[^32]

The song "Pov Piti," the *Coin Coin* project, and Matana Roberts herself
form a singularity—an epicenter or node—of black digital practice and
its relationship with slavery’s archive. Roberts and her ghosts pose
critical questions and possibilities for what can and cannot be done
with the data found in slavery’s archive, with digital and social media,
and historical narratives of bondage—particularly narratives of intimacy
and sex, violence, and property. Roberts feared hearing voices would
induce states of psychosis, then reframed her haunting against
encounters with her own ancestry as a descendant of Coin Coin. She
created sonic histories where poor little enslaved girls scream,
materialize on city streets, and spill themselves across blogs, grams,
and tweets. Unafraid of emotion, Roberts rooted the unspeakable affect
of the trade in her own mourning, even sounding out the cries heard in
pov piti herself, in the wake of her mother’s death.[^33] She played
with quantity, layering femme whispers upon femme whispers, one colonial
language over another. Coin Coin is ("I am") regardless of whether there
is visual proof ("There will never be any pictures of me"), and in
Roberts’s creation, she time-travels from the past into a new present to
live again.

{% include image.html
    img="issue03/johnson-vid-a.png"
    url="https://player.vimeo.com/video/23003301?autoplay=1&loop=1&color=ffffff"
    title='Matana Roberts, "Mississippi Moonchile," *Coin Coin*. Directed by Radwan Moumneh.'
    caption='Matana Roberts, "Mississippi Moonchile," *Coin Coin*. Directed by Radwan Moumneh.' %}

Fluid and fugitive, Matana Roberts and Coin Coin do not occupy a single
digital project space or site. Coin Coin, through Roberts, does what she
could not in life—she absconds. She becomes Maroon code. The *Coin Coin*
project escapes from written documents, the analog, and the archive. It
transforms the use of digital tools as they become available and so
transforms the listener-user’s relationship to sound, subjects, and
subjectivity, the living and the dead. At points, over and over, Coin
Coin disappears from sight and reappears on sites in whispers and
phantasms. It is possible to find, for instance, images Roberts
previously posted on Instagram, where they have been archived by
different jazz websites. This mediated existence echoes the archive
enslaved men and women created with their testimony, in slave narratives
dictated to but edited by white abolitionists. Marisa Parham, theorizing
hauntings in African American literature, described them as more than
echoes of past people, lives, or experiences. Hauntings, particularly of
past trauma, both return from beyond and constitute lifeways in the
present. The *Coin Coin* project, with its missing and mediated,
ephemeral and historically tangible, gives hauntings a power to use and
be used in the service of a historical narrative that does not reproduce
humans as solely nodes of data.

Matana Roberts’s intellectual and creative works illustrate the kind of
interventions black digital practice makes in conversations around
digital humanities, justice, and history. Using digital tools to
excavate slavery’s archive generates histories of intimate violence,
torment, and dispossession. A digital praxis attuned to black life and
not to slavery’s penchant for black death cannot ignore loss,
heartbreak, absence, and silence. Black digital practice makes space for
this praxis, for black diasporic longing, insurgence, hauntings, and
community mourning to inform how digital tools might be used to uncover
acts of resistance, insurgent politics, and evidence of self-fashioning.
Black digital practice incorporates analog pasts; transgresses
boundaries between institutions, communities, and individuals; and is
unafraid of the ephemeral or incremental in comparison. In the black
diasporic subterranean that is slavery’s archive, black digital practice
has the potential to call into being the fluidity, dispersal, and
mobility that has always existed alongside structural, personal, and
intimate embodiments of violence. It offers an opportunity to look both
into and at the data without losing emotion, sensation, and redress as a
framing for black life.

## Part 4. We Keep the Light

Dark space and illumination represent the twin poles of commodification
slavery necessitated. One occasioned the disappeared and dispossessed,
the genocidal stakes at the heart of making a New World, the other a
rapacious and ravenous consumption only colonialism could beget. A
xroads praxis exceeds this binary. It recognizes that the absence is
there and then attends to it.

{% include image.html
    img="issue03/johnson-e.png"
    title="Parham’s Inverted Maury Map"
    caption="In "Black Haunts in the Anthropocene," Marisa Parham
    inverts the white and black space in Schmdit’s data visualization."
    url="http://blackhaunts.mp285.com/" 
%}

To return to the spiderweb of Maury voyages, in "Black Haunts in the
Anthropocene" Parham writes:

> I find the images haunting, but the dark lines of the triangle trade
> are not sooty from centuries of moving Africans into new world
> slavery, nor from moving the fruits of their labor to fuel others’
> growth. They are dark because those sea roots were there before the
> slave trade. This fact gives me a feeling of a timeless before and
> after, which is difficult to reconcile with any sense of enduring
> historical impact. Even despite their immense violence, the men
> pushing and pulling bodies across the Atlantic were only men, hoping
> for a good wind. A bug on a leaf, torn from the tree.[^34]

Striving, desiring, lusting for a xroads practice affirms that there is
black humanity somewhere on the other side of the Middle Passage, after
the hurricane, deep in the prison cell. At the crossroads, the things we
make (hashtags, tweets, Instagram posts, multimedia exhibits, archives,
and blogs) may remain or they may disappear, may break or may be
stolen/archived/corrupted, even without our permission. But they haunt,
they scream, and they remain accountable to the living and lived. In a
xroads praxis, the destination is less important than our survival, our
machines are less important than the humans inside them, and we never
forget that even in the dark we keep the light.

{% include image.html
    img="issue03/johnson-vid-b.png"
    url="https://www.youtube.com/embed/mO-PAYLa0Y0"
    title='Lighter Thieves. "We Keep the Light."'
    caption='Lighter Thieves. "We Keep the Light."' %}


## Acknowledgments

An earlier version of this essay was first presented as a keynote
address at the "Race, Memory, and the Digital Humanities Symposium" at the
College of William and Mary, Williamsburg, Virginia, 26–28 October 2017.
Thank you to Liz Losh for hosting that historic event. Thank you to Alex
Gil, Kaiama Glover, and anonymous reviewers for their constructive
critique of this essay; any mistakes are mine and mine alone. This work
was incubated with and influenced by Clyde Woods; Katherine McKittrick;
Rae Paris; Bettina Judd; \#Scenesat20, a symposium in honor of Saidiya
Hartman’s *Scenes of Subjection* (particularly Fred Moten’s "Blackness
Is X"); Yomaira Figueroa; Bianca Laureano of the LatiNegrxs Project;
Mark Anthony Neal; students in the Black Code studies course I taught at
Johns Hopkins University (Spring 2017); students in the \#femdh course I
taught (with Liz Losh) at the 2017 Digital Humanities Summer Institute,
University of Victoria, British Columbia; contributors on the
\#BlackTheory hashtag; Matana Roberts; Marie Thérèse Coincoin Metoyer;
Farris Armand of the Lighter Thieves; New Orleans, Louisiana; Utuado,
Puerto Rico; and my grandmother, Mary Nuñez.

---
 

[^1]: On slavery and other forms of labor in Puerto Rico, see Jorge L.
    Chinea, "A Quest for Freedom: The Immigration of Maritime Maroons
    into Puerto Rico, 1656–1800," *Journal of Caribbean History;
    Kingston, Jamaica* 31, no. 1 (1997): 51–87; Luis A. Figueroa,
    *Sugar, Slavery, and Freedom in Nineteenth-Century Puerto Rico*
    (Chapel Hill: University of North Carolina Press, 2006); Jay
    Kinsbruner, *Not of Pure Blood: The Free People of Color and Racial
    Prejudice in Nineteenth-Century Puerto Rico* (Durham, NC: Duke
    University Press, 1996); Francisco A. Scarano, *Sugar and Slavery in
    Puerto Rico: The Municipality of Ponce, 1815–1849* (Madison:
    University of Wisconsin Press, 1984); Luis M. Díaz Soler, *Historia
    de la esclavitud negra en Puerto Rico* (1953; repr., San Juan: La
    Editorial, University of Puerto Rico, 1970); and David M. Stark,
    *Slave Families and the Hato Economy in Puerto Rico* (Gainesville:
    University Press of Florida, 2015). For the period immediately
    following emancipation through annexation by the United States, see
    Eileen J. Suárez Findlay, *Imposing Decency: The Politics of
    Sexuality and Race in Puerto Rico, 1870–1920* (Durham, NC: Duke
    University Press, 2000).

[^2]: Guabancex is the Taino goddess of storms: "Guabancex stirs the
    great blue pot of the Atlantic until the bitter saltwater breaks on
    all its shores." Aurora Levins Morales, *Remedios: Stories of Earth
    and Iron from the History of Puertorriqueñas* (Boston: South End
    Press, 2001), 53.

[^3]: US Census Bureau, 2010 Census of Population and Housing, *Summary
    Population and Housing Characteristics*, CPH-1-53, Puerto Rico
    (Washington, DC: US Government Printing Office, 2012). See summaries
    of race and Hispanic or Latin origin here:
    <https://factfinder.census.gov/bkmk/table/1.0/en/DEC/10_SF1/GCTP3.ST10/0400000US72>.

[^4]: Natasha Trethewey, "Native Guard," in *Native Guard: Poems*
    (Boston: Mariner, 2007), 25.

[^5]: Powerful exceptions to this in the days immediately following the
    hurricane include Defend Puerto Rico
    ([http://www.defendpr.com](http://www.defendpr.com/)), Rosa
    Clemente’s documentary unit PR on the Map (<http://pronthemap.com>),
    the Palabras for Puerto Rico initiative launched from Michigan State
    University (\#ProyectoPalabrasPR), and Afro-diasporic descendants on
    the island and across the diaspora. See Yomaira Figueroa, "Borikén’s
    Present Past or the Archive of Disappearances," *Yomaira C. Figuero,
    PhD* (blog), 1 October 2017,
    [http://www.yomairafigueroa.com/blog-1/2017/9/30/present-past-or-the-archive-of-disappearances](https://web.archive.org/web/20190223191402/http:/www.yomairafigueroa.com/blog-1/2017/9/30/present-past-or-the-archive-of-disappearances).

[^6]: Benjamin Kentish, "Puerto Ricans Accuse Trump of Treating Them
    ‘like Dogs’ during Disaster Visit," *Independent*, 5 October 2017,
    [https://www.independent.co.uk/news/world/americas/trump-puerto-ricans-treat-like-dog-hurricane-maria-visit-accusation-a7985326.html](https://web.archive.org/web/20190223191455/https:/www.independent.co.uk/news/world/americas/trump-puerto-ricans-treat-like-dog-hurricane-maria-visit-accusation-a7985326.html).

[^7]: Alexia Fernández Campbell, "It Took 11 Months to Restore Power to
    Puerto Rico after Hurricane Maria; a Similar Crisis Could Happen
    Again," *Vox*, 15 August 2018,
    [https://www.vox.com/identities/2018/8/15/17692414/puerto-rico-power-electricity-restored-hurricane-maria](https://web.archive.org/web/20190223191640/https:/www.vox.com/identities/2018/8/15/17692414/puerto-rico-power-electricity-restored-hurricane-maria).

[^8]: Fray Ramon Pané, An Account of the Antiquities of the Indians: A
    New Edition (Durham, NC: Duke University Press, 1999), 29.

[^9]: Sylvia Wynter, "1492: A New World View," in Vera Lawrence Hyatt
    and Rex Nettleford, eds., *Race, Discourse, and the Origin of the
    Americas: A New World View* (Washington, DC: Smithsonian
    Institution, 1995), 5–57.

[^10]: Marisa Parham, "Black Haunts in the Anthropocene," *Notebook*
    (blog), mp285.com, 26 January 2014,
    <https://mp285.com/nb/black-anthropocene>.

[^11]: Christina Sharpe, *In the Wake: On Blackness and Being* (Durham,
    NC: Duke University Press, 2016), 9.

[^12]: See Slave Voyages,
    [https://slavevoyages.org](https://slavevoyages.org/),
    *Trans-Atlantic Slave Trade Database*, Itinerary, Place of Landing,
    Puerto Rico. The first documented slave ship to land in Puerto Rico
    was an unnamed vessel in 1520. The final documented slave ship was
    *La Majestad* in 1859. The Jones Act was signed in 1920.

[^13]: On these oft-remarked on but little documented communication
    networks, see Julius Scott, *A Common Wind: Afro-American
    Organization in the Revolution Against Slavery* (New York: Verso,
    2018). For their extension even on land and for a later century, see
    Anne Eller, *We Dream Together: Dominican Independence, Haiti, and
    the Fight for Caribbean Freedom* (Durham, NC: Duke University Press,
    2016).

[^14]: On lantern laws as surveillance, see Simone Browne, *Dark
    Matters: On the Surveillance of Blackness* (Durham, NC: Duke
    University Press, 2015). On the New York slave conspiracy, see
    Leslie M. Harris, *In the Shadow of Slavery: African Americans in
    New York City, 1626–1863* (Chicago: University of Chicago Press,
    2003); and Craig Steven Wilder, *In The Company of Black Men: The
    African Influence on African American Culture in New York City* (New
    York: New York University Press, 2002).

[^15]: Lauren McLeod Cramer and Alessandra Raengo, "Freeing Black Codes:
    Liquid Blackness Plays the Jazz Ensemble," *The Black Scholar* 47,
    no. 3 (2017): 8–21.

[^16]: See Abdul Alkhalimat,
    [http://www.eblackstudies.org](https://web.archive.org/web/20190223192132/http:/www.eblackstudies.org/);
    Alondra Nelson, "Afrofuturism: Archive," 16 June 2011,
    [https://alondranelson.wordpress.com/2011/06/16/afrofuturism-archive](https://web.archive.org/web/20180711072802/https:/alondranelson.wordpress.com/2011/06/16/afrofuturism-archive/);
    Moya Bailey and Ayana A. H. Jamieson, "Guest Editors’ Introduction:
    Palimpsests in the Life and Work of Octavia E. Butler," *Palimpsest:
    A Journal on Women, Gender, and the Black International* 6, no. 1
    (2017): v–xiii; Radical Women of Color Bloggers Blogring,
    [https://www.ringsurf.com/ring/idabwells](https://web.archive.org/web/20190223192331/https:/www.ringsurf.com/ring/idabwells/);
    Brittney C. Cooper, Susana M. Morris, and Robin M. Boylorn, eds.,
    *The Crunk Feminist Collection* (New York: Feminist Press at CUNY,
    2017); the Brown Girl Museums Blog,
    [http://www.browngirlsmuseumblog.com](https://web.archive.org/web/20190223192411/http:/www.browngirlsmuseumblog.com/);
    Angel Nieves et al., "Black Spatial Humanities: Theories, Methods,
    and Praxis in Digital Humanities (A Follow-up NEH ODH Summer
    Institute Panel)," in *DH* (2017); Kim Gallon, "Making a Case for
    the Black Digital Humanities," in Matthew K. Gold and Lauren Klein,
    eds., *Debates in the Digital Humanities 2016*(Minneapolis:
    University of Minnesota Press, 2016); Center for Solutions to Online
    Violence,
    [http://femtechnet.org/csov/do-better](https://web.archive.org/web/20190223192455/http:/femtechnet.org/csov/do-better/);
    and \#transformDH,
    [http://transformdh.org](https://web.archive.org/web/20190223192540/http:/transformdh.org/).

[^17]: Jessica Marie Johnson and Mark Anthony Neal, "Introduction: Wild
    Seed in the Machine," *The Black Scholar* 47, no. 3 (2017): 1. For
    more on black digital practice, see Jessica Marie Johnson, "Markup
    Bodies: Black \[Life\] Studies and Slavery \[Death\] Studies at the
    Digital Crossroads," *Social Text*, no. 137 (December 2018): 57–79;
    and Jessica Marie Johnson, "4DH + 1 Black Code / Black Femme Forms
    of Knowledge and Practice," *American Quarterly* 70, no. 3 (2018):
    665–70.

[^18]: See Marisa J. Fuentes, Dispossessed Lives: Enslaved Women,
    Violence, and the Archive (Philadelphia: University of Pennsylvania
    Press, 2016); Saidiya V. Hartman, Scenes of Subjection: Terror,
    Slavery, and Self-Making in Nineteenth-Century America (New York:
    Oxford University Press, 1997); Jennifer L. Morgan, "Accounting for
    ‘the Most Excruciating Torment’: Gender, Slavery, and Trans-Atlantic
    Passages," History of the Present 6 (2016): 184–207; Clyde Adrian
    Woods, Development Arrested: The Blues and Plantation Power in the
    Mississippi Delta (New York: Verso, 1998); Moya Bailey,
    "\#transform(ing)DH Writing and Research: An Autoethnography of
    Digital Humanities and Feminist Ethics," Digital Humanities
    Quarterly 9, no. 2 (2015); and Stephen Matthias Harney and Fred
    Moten, The Undercommons: Fugitive Planning and Black Study (New
    York: Autonomedia, 2013). See also Sharpe, *In the Wake*; Browne,
    *Dark Matters*; and Wynter, "1492: A New World View."

[^19]: Alexis Pauline Gumbs, M Archive: After the End of the World
    (Durham, NC: Duke University Press, 2018), 6.

[^20]: See Robert Farris Thompson, *Flash of the Spirit: African and
    Afro-American Art and Philosophy* (New York: Vintage, 2010). See
    also Nettrice R. Gaskins, "The African Cosmogram Matrix in
    Contemporary Art and Culture," *Black Theology* 14, no. 1 (2016):
    28–42.

[^21]: Matana Roberts, "pov piti," *Coin Coin Chapter One: Gens de
    couleur libres*, CD (Constellation Records, 2011).

[^22]: Lyle Saxon, Edward Dreyer, Robert Tallant, and the Louisiana
    Writers’ Project, *Gumbo YA-YA: Folk Tales of Louisiana* (Boston:
    Houghton Mifflin, 1945), 436.

[^23]: Ibid., 436–37 (Saxon’s translation).

[^24]: Adelaide van Wey, "Pauv’ Piti’ Mom’zelle Zizi," *Street Cries and
    Creole Songs of New Orleans*, LP (Folkways Records RF 203 \[1964\],
    1956). Many thanks to musicologist Guthrie Ramsey for helping me put
    this recording in context; any mistakes are my own.

[^25]: Dr. John and the Donald Harrison Band, "Mamzelle Zizi," *Funky
    New Orleans*, CD (Union Square Music, 2000); Georges Fourcade,
    "Mamzelle Zizi," *Le barde créole*, CD (Takamba, 2001).

[^26]: Amber Jamilla Musser, *Sensational Flesh: Race, Power, and
    Masochism* (New York: New York University Press, 2014), 2.

[^27]: See H. Sophie Burton, "Free People of Color in Spanish Colonial
    Natchitoches: Manumission and Dependency on the Louisiana-Texas
    Frontier, 1766–1803," *Louisiana History* 45, no. 2 (2004): 173–97;
    H. Sophie Burton and F. Todd Smith, *Colonial Natchitoches: A Creole
    Community on the Louisiana-Texas Frontier* (College Station: Texas
    A&M University Press, 2008); Elizabeth Shown Mils, "Marie Thérèse
    Coincoin: Cane River Slave, Slave Owner, and Paradox," in Janet
    Allured and Judith F. Gentry, eds., *Louisiana Women: Their Lives
    and Times* (Athens: University of Georgia Press, 2009); and Gary B.
    Mills and Elizabeth Shown Mills, *The Forgotten People: Cane River’s
    Creoles of Color* (1997; repr., Baton Rouge: Louisiana State
    University Press, 2013).

[^28]: "Matana Roberts," Constellation Records,
    [http://cstrecords.com/matana-roberts](https://web.archive.org/web/20190223192654/http:/cstrecords.com/matana-roberts/);
    Peter Margasak, "Matana Roberts Drops the Stunning Second Chapter of
    Her Coin Coin Project," *Chicago Reader*, 4 October 2013,
    [https://www.chicagoreader.com/Bleader/archives/2013/10/04/matana-roberts-drops-the-stunning-second-chapter-of-her-coin-coin-project](https://web.archive.org/web/20190223192826/https:/www.chicagoreader.com/Bleader/archives/2013/10/04/matana-roberts-drops-the-stunning-second-chapter-of-her-coin-coin-project).
    Graphic notation is representation of music through the use of
    visual symbols outside the realm of traditional music notation.

[^29]: "Matana Roberts," Constellation Records.

[^30]: Matana Roberts, *Coin Coin Chapter Two: Mississippi Moonchile*,
    CD (Constellation Records, 2013); Matana Roberts, *Coin Coin Chapter
    Three: River Run Thee*, CD (Constellation Records, 2015).

[^31]: George Lydiard Sulivan, *Dhow Chasing in Zanzibar Waters and on
    the Eastern Coast of Africa: Narrative of Five Years’ Experiences in
    the Suppression of the Slave Trade* (London: S. Low, Marston, Low,
    and Searle, 1873).

[^32]: Matana Roberts, quoted in Stewart Smith, "Traces of People: An
    Interview with Matana Roberts," 6 October 2015,
    <http://thequietus.com/articles/18937-matana-roberts-interview>.

[^33]: In an interview with Molly Sheridan of New Music Box in 2013,
    Roberts explained the context of the screams on the first volume:
    "My mother had passed away, maybe ten days before that was recorded.
    So those screams were therapeutic in a different kind of way. But
    there’s a welcoming to them too—you know? We’re here, I’m alive,
    let’s celebrate what we do have." Matana Roberts, quoted in Molly
    Sheridan, "Matana Roberts: Creative Defiance; Interview by Molly
    Sheridan," *New Music Box*, 1 February 2013,
    [https://nmbx.newmusicusa.org/matana-roberts-creative-defiance](https://web.archive.org/web/20190223193226/https:/nmbx.newmusicusa.org/matana-roberts-creative-defiance/).

[^34]: Parham, "Black Haunts in the Anthropocene."
