---
layout: page
section: introduction
issue: 3
order: 2
date: April 2019
title: "We Are Deathless (Slavery in the Machine)"
doi: "10.7916/D8NS1689"
author: 
- name: Jessica Marie Johnson
  shortname: Johnson
  bio: ""
language: en
special: multiverse
---

EDITORS: Johnson prefers capped “Global North,” but *small axe* style
is “global North.” Your call. Also, she refers to Lizabeth
Paravisini-Gebert as Lisa. Paravisini-Gebert signs her emails “Lisa” but
her essay says “Lizabeth.” Again, your call. See highlights.


## Slavery in the Machine

<div>
i, <br>

<ul class=“multiverse” data-multiverse-timer=“3000”>
    <li>the crosssroads</li>
    <li>spirit</li>
    <li>the dead</li>    
    <li>the deathless</li>  
    <li>the living</li>   
    <li>humanity</li>
</ul>

carried <br>

<ul class=“multiverse” data-multiverse-timer=“6000”>
    <li>the fractional</li>
    <li>the missing</li>
    <li>the destroyed</li>
</ul>

(this, <br>

<ul class=“multiverse” data-multiverse-timer=“3000”>
    <li>political and deliberate lost-in-translation</li>
    <li>masking</li>
    <li>testimony</li>
    <li><i>mi isla</i></li>)
</ul>

for years <br>

<ul class=“multiverse” data-multiverse-timer=“6000”>
    <li>of collaboration</li>
    <li>of accountability</li>
    <li>of community</li>
</ul>

and years <br>

<ul class=“multiverse” data-multiverse-timer=“3000”>
    <li>of creating</li>
    <li>of remixing</li>
    <li>of redoing</li>
    <li>of recovering</li>
</ul>

</div>

footnote -

This text is remixed with Ibeyi, “I Carried This for Years,” *Ash*
(2017), using multiverse.js, a script built by Ed Summers.
<multiverse.js> (Accessed 20 February 2019.)

French-Cuban songstresses Lisa-Kaindé Diaz and Naomi Diaz of Ibeyi wrote
“Deathless” out of a haunting. Describing the inspiration behind the
song, Lisa-Kaindé told the story of being harassed by a police officer
in Paris at sixteen years old. The harassment only stopped when the
police officer wrenched her bag from her hands and a book from it
spilled on the floor. She related, “And I think he thought, ‘Oh, she
might be intelligent and have something in her head.’ So he just gave me
my empty bag and left.”[^1] Against saxophonist Kamasi Washington’s
lilting playing, two haunting verses narrate that moment of terror,
evoking the confusion and fear of a teenaged girl who was, “Innocent /
Sweet sixteen / Frozen with fear.” At the same time, in the breaks
between these verses, the chorus of the song tells a different story.
Defying the authority and threat embodied in the looming figure of the
police officer, Ibeyi sings out in defiance, “Whatever happens, whatever
happened / Oh hey / We are deathless / We are deathless.”

This special issue of *sx archipelagos*, “Slavery in the Machine,” sings
out with that same defiance. In the face of environmental catastrophes,
“unpayable debt” levied by a global North created out of plantation
profits, police and military violence, and the continued predations of
US empire, the Caribbean and its diaspora refuse death. Our women,
children, and men rebuke the “bad press” spoken in their name by
outsiders. Our artists refuse to be bound by the permutations of forced
migration or nation-centric narratives of being, cleaving instead to
affinities, networks, relations that cross islands and mainlands, race
and empire. If this story of refusal seems timeless as well as
deathless, or if in evoking a dense humanity and attention to spirit,
the past, present, and future appear to cycle back through wind currents
ridden by conquistadores in 1492 or the combustion of revolt that marked
1791, this, too, is part of the work. Which is to say, refusing linear
historical accounts for multilayered and collagic narratives is
accountable Caribbeanist scholarly praxis. Refusing material or
empirical knowledges for the fractional and fractal, the hidden books,
the hauntings at the crossroads, is diasporic and ancestral intellectual
labor. If being deathless requires an art, a discipline, an ethic, a way
of being, then the Caribbean has death mastered.

And if being deathless requires a code book, a metadata, a markup
language, then the contributors to this issue have dared to write it.
What does the digital have to say, after all, to a region of the world
that has often been framed as natural and primitive, exotic and
excessive, but rarely as possessing its own indigenous technologies for
unpacking the brutalities of the New World? The contributors to “Slavery
in the Machine” speak across historiographies and archives, literatures
and audiences to provide an array of answers. As a body, the
contributions gathered here challenge readers to expand their frame in
horizontal and vertical directions—to stand at the crossroads—and
reconsider questions, digital as well as analog, that humanists have
taken for granted. Digital projects build themselves around interactions
with users. Liberal humanism roots itself in the power of the
individual, the head of household, Man. In contrast, the contributors to
this special issue question whether self and subjectivity can exist
beyond the kinship of community, the spirit world, the living and the
dead, humanity, or the earth itself. Digital humanities has made
significant inroads in the social sciences and humanistic study more
broadly, particularly in the fields of history and English. These fields
privilege empirical analysis, large data sets, broad swaths of collected
material. Instead of demanding empiricism, the contributors to this
special issue take the chaos of colonialism, the destruction of the
hurricane, and the cleansing heat of the slave revolt’s fire as evidence
of the impossibility of the complete data set. Instead, they embrace
disaster as data, gather the fractional, the missing, and the destroyed
and hold those null values as sites of analysis that center Caribbean
realities and mysteries.

The contributors to this special issue trust in black diasporic
technologies that predate the digital age. From masking, to evading
state testimony, to being lost in translation, to diasporic longing for
home(s/lands) and communal spaces, the Caribbean has long offered its
own strategies for decoding antiblackness and encoding anticolonial
scripts in its people. These contributors take these indigenous
knowledges and apply them to code and tech, creating interfaces that
reach across disciplines in collaboration, that shape new kinds of
community in the alternate time/space of the online forum, and that
outline ethics for practicing a radical accountability to Caribbean
people themselves. As a result, the contributors apply the digital to
the work of creating, remixing, redoing, and recovering humanity from
the machine that slavery beget, while also rebuking any framing of the
digital that sets slavery, black life, or the Caribbean outside the
analysis.

The contributions to this issue offer a rich range of work to engage.
“Slavery in the Machine” is composed of three essays, one hypertext
experience, two project reflections, and one project review. In an essay
on the stakes of and methodologies for producing new narratives of
Haiti, Marlene Daut challenges scholars to “ensure that the new or
alternative narratives we encourage, craft, and center to oppose bad
press will in fact not generate similarly, or perhaps newly, hostile and
harmful images of Haiti.” Using the crossroads as her methodologic
sounding board and analyzing several digital projects that take up Haiti
or the Haitian Revolution as their primary topic, Daut explores how
“using multimodal archival methods to document the Haitian past can help
us to better understand the political processes that drove Haitians to
create and sustain an independent nation-state in the nineteenth
century.” In “The Slave-Machine: Slavery, Capitalism, and the
‘Proletariat’ in *The Black Jacobins* and *Capital*,” Nick Nesbitt
explores the machinery of capitalism. Centering C. L. R. James’s claim
in the iconic text *The Black Jacobins* that the enslaved of
eighteenth-century Saint Domingue were “closer to a modern proletariat
than any group of workers in existence at the time,” Nesbitt compares
the powerful political rhetoric in James’s text with Marx’s more narrow
definition of *proletariat* and *capitalism*. In “Xroads Praxis: Black
Diasporic Technologies for Remaking the New World,” I return to the
devastation spread by Hurricane María and use the blackout created by
the hurricane—a blackness so intense it could be seen from space—as a
jumping off point for considering what missing data, black spaces,
\#BlackTheory, and histories of slavery can do to humanize digitized
data sets. By proposing an “xroads praxis,” I challenge digital
humanists to explore “what digital and analog landscapes hide and
reveal, seeing them in their fullness after the storm of 1441/1492,
finding black space on the map that does not conclude in black death.”
Marisa Parham’s “Breaking, Dancing, Making in the Machine: Notes on
.break .dance” proceeds to do precisely this work. Like Daut and me,
Parham uses the crossroads, but she expands her analysis to include
movement and ephemerality as codes in and of themselves. Parham surfaces
black diasporic knowledge as a constituent technology in the making of
the New World. This groundbreaking essay is the highest form of
humanistic study, digital or analog. Parham’s “.break .dance”
exemplifies the kind of rigorous, creative, and challenging
possibilities that unfold when black diasporic intellectual work is
taken seriously, and digital tools and coding languages are learned for
their theoretical as well as their material function, not as
grant-chasing pursuits.

In keeping with the theme of missing data and defying death, Ada Ferrer
and Linda Rodríguez explore *Digital Aponte*, their project translating
the life and paintings of nineteenth-century Cuban artist and insurgent
José Antonio Aponte into digital form. Spanish officials arrested Aponte
during a series of slave revolts in 1812. Officials used his book of
painting—a fantastic collection of original, collage, and remixed images
featuring black saints, Toussaint Louverture, Egyptian iconography, and
more—as evidence of his guilt. The book of paintings, however, has not
surfaced in the years since. Ferrer and Rodriguez explore what it means
to relate a life like Aponte’s. He was a man whose artistic
transgressions occupied Spanish investigators and led to his execution
(at the crossroads), and his story would seem to end with his death. But
it is in his masking, that is, in the work he hid, destroyed,
dissembled, and avoided discussing, that Ferrer and Rodriguez find
inspiration. In “The Caribbean Digital and Open Peer Review: A *Musical
Passage* Hypothesis,” Laurent Dubois, David Garner, and Mary Caton
Lingold use the missing, the ephemeral, and the haunting echo of data as
music and musical production to imagine community differently.
Describing their process of peer review and the online forum they
created to discuss and share work related to *Musical Passage*, Dubois,
Garner, and Lingold remind us that one of the many contributions
technology offers scholars of the Caribbean and the African diaspora is
the opportunity to find intellectual, political, and sonic kin by
creating virtual spaces that transgress borders. Lisa Paravisini-Gebert,
in her review of *Puerto Rico Syllabus* notes a similar community formed
from Columbia University’s Unpayable Debt Working Group. In 2016 the
Puerto Rico Oversight, Management, and Economic Stability Act (PROMESA),
signed by President Barack Obama, placed an impossible burden of debt
and austerity on the island of Puerto Rico, leading to massive student
and activist protests in Puerto Rico and on the mainland. Using the
hashtag syllabus as form, medium, and genre, the *Puerto Rico Syllabus*
surfaced a conversation—a missing dataset—that challenged these
austerity measures with evidence from across the disciplines and in a
public format accessible to organizers, teachers, and laypeople on the
ground.

<script src=‘https://edsu.github.com/multiverse/multiverse.js’></script>

<div>

This special issue, with its wide range of themes, techniques, styles,
methods, and applications, deals in black diasporic knowledge as a
technology that has been like Aponte’s insurgent book—hidden “deep
inside a trunk full of clothes” in “a pine box with a sliding top.” Not
absent, but hidden. Not lost, but secreted away. Never rejected, simply
folded up for secret pleasure alone or with kin. Not accountable or even
legible to institutions, but brimming with multiple legibilities and
infinite literacies, accountable to black life, joy, and freedom
projects around the world. Not dead, but deathless. Or, to remix another
song by Ibeyi, we have carried

<ul class=“multiverse” data-multiverse-timer=“3000”>

<li>the crosssroads</li>

<li>spirit</li>

<li>the dead</li>

<li>the deathless</li>

<li>the living</li>

<li>humanity</li>

for years and years. In this issue, scholars of the Caribbean and the
African diaspora offer a glimpse of that joy and burden and what it
means to confront slavery in the machine.<br>

This special issue is dedicated to scholar, organizer, and beautiful
artistic soul Linda Rodriguez (1978–2018). There are no words to
describe the pain of losing her, a pain everyone who knew her shared.
Linda, we miss you. We have more to learn from you. We continue to read,
to study, and to listen.

---

[^1]: Alyssa Edes, “Ibeyi on Spirituality and Joy in ‘Ash,’” 4 October
    2017, https://www.kbbi.org/post/ibeyi-spirituality-and-joy-ash.
