---
layout: article
section: articles
title: 
  long: >
    The Slave-Machine: Slavery, Capitalism, and the "Proletariat" in *The Black Jacobins* and *Capital*
  short: "The Slave-Machine"
doi: "10.7916/archipelagos-mq09-v798"
author: 
- name: Nick Nesbitt  
  shortname: Nesbitt
  bio: >
    Nick Nesbitt is a professor of French at Princeton University. Most recently, he is the author of *Caribbean Critique: Antillean Critical Theory from Toussaint to Glissant* (Liverpool University Press, 2013) and the editor of *The Concept in Crisis: Reading "Capital" Today* (Duke University Press, 2017).
date: July 9 2019
issue: 3
order: 3
abstract: >
  This essay argues that C. L. R. James’s Marxist humanism is inherently inadequate for describing the distinction and transition between slavery and capitalism. To do so, the essay interrogates James’s famous claim in *The* *Black Jacobins* (1938) that the slaves of St. Domingue were “closer to a modern proletariat than any group of workers in existence at the time,” by comparing James’s understanding of the concept of *proletariat*—there and in *World Revolution* (1937)—with Marx’s various developments of the concept across the three volumes of *Capital*. This analysis distinguishes James’s political and historicist deployment of the term from Marx’s analytical usage of the notion in his categorial critique of capitalism. In contrast with James’s linear, Marxist-humanist understanding of the passage from slavery to capitalism, Marx himself demarcates a well-defined delineation between these two basic categories, understood in *Capital* as analytically (as opposed to historically) distinct modes of production. The essay thus concludes by analyzing Marx’s conceptual differentiation of slavery and industrial capitalism in *Capital*, drawing on Etienne Balibar’s analysis of the concepts of mode of production and transition in *Reading Capital* (1965).
language: en
---

{% include epigraph.html
    quote = "The slaves worked on the land, and, like revolutionary peasants everywhere, they aimed at the extermination of their oppressors. But working and living together in gangs of hundreds on the huge sugar-factories which covered the North Plain, they were closer to a modern proletariat than any group of workers in existence at the time, and the rising was, therefore, a thoroughly prepared and organized mass movement."
    citation = "C. L. R. James, <em>The Black Jacobins</em>."
%}


In this famous passage that opens the fourth chapter of *The Black
Jacobins: Toussaint L’Ouverture and the San Domingo Revolution*, to
initiate its narration of the Haitian Revolution proper, C. L. R. James,
almost in passing, without explicitly developing its theoretical
implications but with the incisive originality that marks this famous
text from start to finish, places the lived experience of the slaves of
St. Domingue at the incipient point of the world-historical struggle of
the global proletariat to overcome the injustices of global capitalism
and to initiate a more just, communist form of social organization.[^1]

Only the year before, James, a militant Marxist-Leninist, had completed
*World Revolution, 1917–1936: The Rise and Fall of the Communist
International*, his incisive history of the Bolshevik Revolution modeled
on Leon Trotsky’s famous study.[^2] James stood at the time as
perhaps the leading anglophone voice of global Trotskyism. Pursuing this
engagement in even more original terms, *The Black Jacobins* is, among
its many virtues and characteristics, an early and perhaps the greatest
work of what was once called Leninist third-worldism.[^3]

While James’s Leninist internationalism is evident throughout *The Black
Jacobins*, to the point of his famous musings on what Vladimir Lenin
might have done in Louverture’s position, in what follows I would like
to probe the meaning and implications of James’s reference in the above
passage to the slaves of St. Domingue as a "modern proletariat," along
with the corresponding, unstated implication in the passage that the
system of plantation slavery production they experienced was an
incipient form of, or tending toward, modern industrial capitalism.[^4]

To do so, I will limit my analysis to considering whether Karl Marx’s
understanding of the concepts of *proletariat* and *slavery* in his
mature work correspond to the uses, both literal and implied, that James
makes of them in the above passage. While Marx’s conceptualizations of
the proletariat and slavery by no means constitute the final word on the
relation of slavery to capitalism, such a move is well justified, I
think, not only by James’s lifelong dedication to both political Marxism
and Marx’s theoretical critique of capitalism itself but also by the
penetrating originality and rigor of Marx’s theorization of the terms
themselves. I focus on this passage from *The Black Jacobins*, then,
because it is James’s single clearest and most direct statement of the
proletarian identity of the St. Domingue slaves. The few other passing
mentions of the "proletariat" in the book lack the specificity of this
passage and merely equate the proletarian condition with that of the
exploited laboring classes in general, independent of their historically
specific subsumption to capital.[^5]

A literal reading of the passage reveals both James’s visionary
rhetorical power of invention and a certain theoretical imprecision.
James does not claim the slaves of *St. Domingue* actually formed a
proletariat, nor that plantation slavery was industrial capitalist in
nature, but only that the situation *tended* in these directions.[^6]
How or in what ways the slaves were "closer to a modern proletariat than
any group of workers in existence at the time," James does not precisely
say. The key factor is stated to be the scale of groups of laborers
("gangs of hundreds") as well as that of the sites in which they were
grouped ("huge sugar-factories"). The reference to factories, given the
overarching Leninist perspective of the book, clearly implies, in my
view, a vision of the sugar plantation as *tending toward* the modern
industrial factory form that Marx would analyze in *Capital*, and,
perhaps even more precisely (I will return to this key distinction
below), as an instance of the intermediate form of production that he
termed "manufacture."[^7]

The conclusion James readily draws from these assertions—both here and
above all in the full deployment of this argument across the book’s
mighty span—is justifiably renowned: the Haitian Revolution was not a
chaotic rebellion but "a thoroughly prepared and organized mass
movement," perhaps the first instance of a consciously conceived and
successfully implemented proletarian revolution, one that, like the
Bolshevik Revolution a century later, occurred not in the center of the
industrial West, as Marx and Friedrich Engels initially hoped, but at
its putatively underdeveloped periphery.

One might justifiably point out that with the single exception of this
key passage—which points forward in visionary terms to the future
developments of this argument by figures such as Eric Williams, Eugene
Genovese, and Robin Blackburn—the notion of the slave as proletarian is
not a focus of *The Black Jacobins*.[^8] The same cannot be said,
however, of James’s *World Revolution*, in which the terms *proletariat*
and *proletarian* appear many hundreds of times. In *World Revolution*,
which was written a year before *The Black Jacobins*, James
unsurprisingly invokes on virtually every one of its five-hundred-some
pages the proletarian working class and its struggle for the
"dictatorship of the proletariat." With a single exception, however, his
use of the term is no more enlightening (as to the precise meaning he
attributes to it) than in his subsequent history of the St. Domingue
revolution. In every other instance, of which there are some four
hundred in the book, "proletariat" is deployed as a purely *political*
term, referring to the (working) class engaged in a militant struggle
for power against the bourgeois domination of the state and society.[^9]

The exception to this uniformity occurs early in *World Revolution*, in
James’s initial presentation of Marxism, when he writes of the
historical division of society into classes. There, he notes that the
"struggle of economic forces for their full expansion was translated, as
always, into a political struggle, the struggle for control of the
State-power without which it is quite impossible to transform the
organisation of society."[^10] In this context, James continues, there
appeared "a new class," one that,

> suffering intolerably from the difficulties created by the chaos in
> production, would be driven to seize the State-power and create the
> conditions for the new Socialist society…. This class Marx and Engels
> found in the proletariat. And as the bourgeoisie within feudal society
> had been consolidated and disciplined by the direction and
> organisation of wealth, in the same way the proletariat, organised in
> factories by the development of the Capitalist system of production,
> disciplined by the increasing discipline of large-scale Capitalist
> organisation, would be forced to combine industrially and ultimately
> politically by the increasing pressure upon them of the bourgeois
> system of production.[^11]

Here, James gives more extensive description and attention to the notion
of the proletariat, as a specific historical development of European
social class structures in the wake of the French Revolution. That said,
the basic characteristics he ascribes to the concept are virtually
identical to those of *The Black Jacobins.* The proletariat, in this
formulation, is characterized by the large-scale organization of
laborers in a factory system of production, by intensive proximity of
working conditions ("forced to combine industrially and ultimately
politically"), and by what James calls "the increasing pressure upon
them of the bourgeois system of production," by which he presumably
means the demands for increases in both intensity and duration of
production (what Marx called the pressure to realize increases in
"absolute surplus value").[^12]

In light, then, of James’s politico-historical, Marxist-Leninist
deployment of the term *proletariat*, both in *World Revolution* and
*The Black Jacobins*, generally and above all in the key passage from
the latter with which I began, it seems to me fair and even compelling
to ask whether the terms of James’s presentation, both literal
("proletariat") and implied (plantation slavery as proto-industrial
capitalism), actually correspond to Marx’s uses of them. I believe in
each case the answer is no.[^13]

How did Marx define the proletariat in his mature (post-1857) writings?
His use of the word *proletariat* across the three volumes of *Capital*
can in fact be readily summarized, and in no case, except for the most
metaphorical, impressionistic sense, can it be applied to plantation
slavery. Occasionally, and also most imprecisely, Marx uses the term in
a general way to indicate the exploited working classes, as, for
example, in the following evocation of the origins of the 1830 July
Revolution in France: "The learned dispute between the industrial
capitalist and the wealthy landowning idler as to how the booty pumped
out of the workers may most advantageously be divided for the purposes
of accumulation had to fall silent in the face of the July Revolution.
Shortly afterwards, the urban proletariat sounded the tocsin of
revolution at Lyons, and the rural proletariat began to set fire to
farmyards and hayricks in England."[^14] This is *proletariat* taken in
the sense of the working class as such, in a capacious, transhistorical
internationalism, one that would include workers of all sorts in their
common experience of exploitation, independently of the mode of
production in which they labored, whether archaic, feudal, or
capitalist.

This sense of the term is universally familiar in Marx and Engels’s
famous invocation in the *Communist Manifesto* to "Proletarians of all
countries!," in which proletarians are those who "have nothing to lose
but their chains."[^15] In this most famous early text—written before
Marx began with the *Grundrisse* in 1857, his critical analysis of
capitalism as social form—it is the entire worker herself, and not
merely, as in the analysis of *Capital*, her *labor power*, that is the
commodity she sells to capital. Arguably, while the purchase and
deployment of the slave as commodity falls under the compass of this
universal experience of exploitation, to enlarge the concept of
proletariat to such an extent renders it rhetorically compelling but
analytically meaningless.

That said, this broad, conceptually vague use of the term *proletariat*
clearly resonates with its traditional, pre-Marxian usage. Famously
derived from the Latin *proletarius*, meaning any citizen of the lowest
class in Roman society, it entered into modern usage from the sixteenth
century to refer to those who live off their manual labor, along with
the poor and indigent more generally.[^16] The implication I am
suggesting here is that James’s use of the term *proletariat* in *The
Black Jacobins* might reasonably be thought to invoke this expansive
sense of exploitation—from the ultra-feudal application of direct
violence in slavery, symbolized by the master’s whip, to the invisible,
fetishized extraction of surplus value from the "free" wage laborer by
the capitalist—were it not, that is, for the single adjective the
militant Marxist-Leninist places before the term: "They were closer to a
*modern* proletariat than any group of workers in existence at the
time."

Marx did not invent the modern notion of *proletarian* that he
immortalized in the *Manifesto* and went on to analyze in scientific
detail in *Capital*, in the sense, that is, of a wage laborer in the
employ of an industrial capitalist. Already in the 1840s, left
Ricardians and socialists such as Henri de Saint-Simon, Pierre-Joseph
Proudhon, J. C. L. Simonde de Sismondi and their lesser followers used
the term freely. Marx knew this literature intimately, and one finds
scores of citations and their scathing critique scattered across the
thousands of pages of Marx’s post-1857 writings.[^17] However, in his
systematic analysis and critique of capitalism as a general social form
or structure, *Capital*, that is to say, Marx, developed two
analytically precise and, in fact, mutually exclusive notions of
*proletariat.*[^18] Neither, in point of fact, is in any conceivable
fashion applicable to plantation slavery understood as a specific,
historical mode of production.

The first is that just mentioned, that of the social class of wage
laborers employed by capital. In the final chapters of *Capital*, volume
1, Marx takes up and even cites his earlier formulation of the concept
in the *Manifesto*,[^19] but goes on in the final chapters of volume 1
to give the term far more analytical precision than in the earlier,
polemical setting of the *Manifesto*.[^20] In fact, in a footnote to
chapter 25 ("The General Law of Capitalist Accumulation"), Marx
categorically affirms this first sense to be the manner in which he
understands the concept within his systematic analysis:

> "Proletarian" must be understood to mean, economically speaking,
> nothing other than "wage-labourer," the man who produces and valorizes
> "capital."…"The sickly proletarian of the primitive forest" is a
> pretty Roscherian fancy. The primitive forester is the owner of the
> primitive forest and uses it as his property, meeting as few obstacles
> to this as an orang-utang. He is not, therefore, a proletarian. This
> would only be the case if the primitive forest exploited him, instead
> of being exploited by him.[^21]

Marx is here unambiguous, and, regarding James’s own assertion, it is
clear that by this definition, the plantation slaves were no proletariat
whatsoever. There can be no question of tendency or degree by Marx’s
definition, no "the closest thing to" earning a wage for their labor.
Either one’s entire being is an object of possession and forced to labor
by the application of direct violence, or one earns a wage, however
derisory.

This unambiguous clarity is muddled, in Marx’s case, by a second, quite
distinct definition of the proletariat that he puts forward in the
famous chapter of *Capital*, "The Secret of Primitive Accumulation."
There, Marx identifies the proletarian as the person who formerly, and
by secular right, owned certain means of production and, also by right,
farmed land for her and her family’s sustenance; from these means and
rights she assured her existence and reproduction.[^22] In the brutal
process of primitive accumulation, these means and rights are violently
stripped away, and the rightless, possessionless proletarian is cast
out, "free," expelled from society: "The proletariat created by the
breaking-up of the bands of feudal retainers and by the forcible
expropriation of the people from the soil, this free and rightless
proletariat could not possibly be absorbed by the nascent manufactures
as fast as it was thrown upon the world."[^23]

This second definition of the term on Marx’s part evokes the original,
literal meaning of the term: the *pro-letarii*, utterly marginalized
from society, those whose only activity is to "produce offspring." Marx
repeatedly, and with savage irony, describes these rightless
proletarians as *vogelfrei*, "free as birds" (as in the phrase, "Seine
Emanzipation verwandelt ihn also sofort in einen vogelfreien
Proletarier"); free, that is, as entirely outside human society,
rightless and unable to sustain themselves.[^24] The point here, as with
the contrasting definition of the proletarian as wage laborer, is that
the plantation slave, in her juridically codified bondage, can in no
sense be considered "free," even in this most ironic, legalistic sense.

It would instead be far more appropriate to use the term *proletariat*
in Marx’s second sense, to indicate the experience of *emancipated*
slaves in the French Caribbean, a newly "enfranchised" community forced
to survive by whatever means available. While in the wake of the 1794
Jacobin abolition survival entailed the construction of autonomous
communes, such as that in Les Cayes, by the time of France’s second,
1848 emancipation, the increasing subsumption of Antillean society to
the demands of capitalist valorization meant that this veritable
proletarianization was experienced as forcible subjection to the
contractual demands of wage labor.[^25]

The historical shift between plantation slave-based and
industrial-capitalist modes of production in the eighteenth and
nineteenth centuries—from the categorial perspective of Marx’s
critique of political economy—neither comprised a gradual, tendential
shift from the former to the latter, nor was it a matter of the size of
manufactures and concentrations of laborers, as James implies in *The
Black Jacobins*. Instead, Marx arguably identifies three key factors
that distinguish these modes of production, factors that are binary
rather than linear.[^26] I say arguably because Marx nowhere analyzes
this question as such, and understandably so, since the object of
*Capital* is the categorial analysis and critique of capitalism in its
ideal form; the historical problems of both of its genesis and
supersession are never addressed in more than passing detail.[^27]
Instead, the determinant factors of these two modes of production must
be identified and collated from analyses occurring across the vast
expanse of the three volumes of *Capital*.

What distinguishes the various economic formations of society, the
distinction between, for example, "a society based on slave-labour and a
society based on wage-labour," Marx writes, "is the form in which this
surplus labour is in each case extorted from the immediate producer, the
worker."[^28] On this count, the categorial distinction between the
plantation slavery and capitalist modes of production is not a matter of
degrees and tendencies. Size of manufactures, concentrations of workers,
degrees and forms of suffering and violence (the criteria James mentions
in both *World Revolution* and *The Black Jacobins*) are indeed, as
James suggests, matters of relative degree and differentiation; for the
question at hand, however, they are transhistorical, nonspecific to
capitalism, and, as such, cannot serve to constitute the distinction
between these two modes of production.

Marx instead identifies various other "factors," such as property
rights, the source of surplus value, and the dual nature of living labor
under capitalism as productive of both use values and surplus
value.[^29] One is either a chattel slave, the material possession of a
slave owner, or one is a contractual, "free" seller of her labor power
for its market value. Such a distinction is not a matter of degree, of
being, in James’s words, "closer to a modern proletariat," but is rather
absolute. In conclusion, then, I shall briefly review Marx’s
understanding of the difference between plantation slavery and
capitalism, to more clearly grasp the distinction between the two—a
distinction James himself invokes only in passing.

Briefly—since to adequately treat the topic of Marx and slavery would
require a book unto itself—in plantation slavery Marx reasonably
understands the slave’s entire person to be the possession or property
of the slaveholder. She is, in the infamous words of the 1685 Code Noir,
his "meuble." This in fact remained legally the case in the French
colonies until 1848. The words of the slave merchant Boisset, writing in
1802 to ask a friend to sell six of his slaves, invoke this property
right: "I give them to you, dear Comrade, and authorize you to sell
them; they are my property."[^30] Correspondingly, as property, slaves
were to be legally prevented in turn from possessing property of their
own. Section 28 of the code is explicit on this count: "Slaves can
possess nothing which is not their Master’s, and all that comes to them
by industry or the liberality of other persons…is acquired as the full
property of their Master."[^31]

As such, the slave is to be considered as, analytically—as opposed to
experientially or phenomenologically—what Marx calls *constant capital.*
Like any other machine, animal, or tool for production that the
plantation owner purchases as a fixed cost, the entire person of the
slave as means of production, as productive machine, is to be used up as
profitably (i.e., as productively and cheaply) as possible: "In the
slave system, the money capital laid out on the purchase of labour-power
plays the role of fixed capital in the money form, and is only gradually
replaced as the active life of the slave comes to an end….The purchase
and sale of slaves is also in its form a purchase and sale of
commodities."[^32] The bookkeeping practices of the plantation system
make this eminently clear (see fig. 1).


{% include image.html
    img="issue03/nesbitt-1.jpg"
    title='&quot;Tableau des Finances et du Commerce de la partie Françoise de St. Domingue,&quot; 1792 (detail). Copy in the John Carter Brown Library, Brown University.'
    caption='Figure 1. &quot;Tableau des Finances et du Commerce de la partie Françoise de St. Domingue,&quot; 1792 (detail). Copy in the John Carter Brown Library, Brown University.'
    url="https://archive.org/details/tableaudesfinanc00slsn" %}

Marx’s assertion of the structural equivalency of slaves, machines, and
animals in the plantation mode of production is strikingly confirmed in
this 1792 document from St. Domingue, which summarizes in a single page the
wealth of St. Domingue in the calendar year 1791.[^33] The document
tabulates the enormous slave-based wealth of St. Domingue during the
interim period between 1789 and the 6 February 1794 abolition, when
slavery was steadfastly sustained by revolutionary governments nominally
committed to creating a state based on the universal rights of man and
citizen. Despite the strict *structural* equivalency it asserts between
slaves ("nègres"), lime ovens ("fours à chaux"), horses, mules, and
"horned animals," the enormous inequality of value between the latter
and the 455,000 slaves the document enumerates is immediately striking.
Even more ironically, by the time the document would have been
communicated to the Metropolitan government—perhaps by François de
Barbé-Marbois, the last intendant of St. Domingue—its content would have
been rendered null by the Northern Plain slave uprising of 21 August
1791 that destroyed many hundreds of the sugar, coffee, and indigo
plantations this document so methodically enumerates and values.

The essential analytical distinction this document conveys, between
slavery and capitalist wage labor, is theoretically grounded in Marx’s
categorial analysis: "The capitalist," Marx observes in the second
volume of *Capital*, "cannot sell the worker again as a commodity, for
he is not his slave, and the capitalist has bought nothing more than the
utilization of his labour-power for a certain time."[^34] As such, and
this is Marx’s key point, in contrast to the wage laborer, no form of constant capital (whose value component, in other words,
remains constant), including slaves, is able to produce the essential
and defining element of capitalism—incremental increases in surplus
value—but instead merely passes on to a commodity preexisting value. Though enabling the *capture* of market profit by their
owner, they themselves *produce* only material use values (sugar, coffee).[^35]

Among the key factors Marx identifies in the transition to the
capitalist mode of production, the imposition of the contractual wage
labor relation is key.[^36] It allows for extraction of surplus value
from living labor, a unique feature of the capitalist mode of
production. Moreover, one might add, among the key points *The Black
Jacobins* as a whole makes eminently clear is that the historical
transition from slavery to capitalism is precisely not gradual and
tendential but revolutionary, the explosive and often violent
destruction of one system and its replacement by another: 1791, 1804,
1848.[^37]

In notebook 2 of the *Grundrisse*, written in November 1857, Marx makes
what in the context of James’s assertions is an extremely interesting
observation on plantation slavery in the United States and its relation
to capitalism: "Negro slavery–a purely industrial slavery—which is,
besides, incompatible with the development of bourgeois society and
disappears with it, presupposes wage labour, and if other, free states
with wage labour did not exist alongside it, if, instead, the Negro
states were isolated, then all social conditions there would immediately
turn into pre-civilized forms."[^38] In this brief but dense comment,
Marx observes that while American slavery is "industrial" in scale and
methods of production, this does not mean it is any sense approaching or
taking the form of the capitalist *mode of production*; this is the case
because a mode of production as Marx understands it is a *form of social
relations* (property, legal, political, familial, reproductive,
economic, etc.) and not a mere ("industrial") method of producing use
values. As such, he states, US ("negro") slavery remains "incompatible
with the development of bourgeois society," an entirely distinct
(social) mode of production. Nonetheless, it exists historically within
a broader socio-economic American context based on capitalist wage
relations ("free states with wage labour"), and even shares certain
superficial similarities with that larger economic context (industrial
scale of production, etc.). Left on its own, however, its *social form*
would revert, Marx asserts, to its own inherent, purely precapitalist,
"pre-civilized" (slavery is, Marx observes, fundamentally barbaric)
forms of appearance.[^39]

Analogously, while slavery in St. Domingue existed in a wider
eighteenth-century context of increasing industrialization of production
and imposition of wage labor, and despite the fact that it adopted some
of the superficial forms of appearance of nascent capitalism ("working
and living together in gangs of hundreds on the huge sugar-factories"),
as a mode of production, in Marx’s sense of the term, slavery in St.
Domingue remained entirely distinct from early Atlantic capitalism,
barbarically premodern, a social form and mode of production in which
humans constituted legal, machinic property (see fig. 2).

{% include image.html
    img="issue03/nesbitt-2.jpg"
    title='&quot;Sucrerie,&quot; from Denis Diderot et al., *Encyclopédie, ou, Dictionnaire raisonné des sciences,des arts et des métiers…/ par Diderot \[et\] d’Alembert* (1751–71) (Parma: F. M. Ricci, 1970–79), vol. 1, plates.'
    caption='Figure 2. &quot;Sucrerie,&quot; from Denis Diderot et al., *Encyclopédie, ou, Dictionnaire raisonné des sciences,des arts et des métiers…/ par Diderot \[et\] d’Alembert* (1751–71) (Parma: F. M. Ricci, 1970–79), vol. 1, plates.' %}

The complex, overdetermined historical process of the transition from
plantation slavery to the industrial production of sugar in Guadeloupe
and Martinique in the 1840s in fact serves precisely to underscore the
imperative of analytical clarity regarding the problem of transition. If
in the years immediately prior to the 1848 abolition there developed a
series of bizarre anomalies in the system, from the renting out of
"slaves" who then received salaried employment in the towns and cities,
to the various documented cases of so-called slaves actually employing
and paying salaries to their so-called masters, such phenomena testify
not to the gradual, linear, becoming-capitalist of the plantation mode
of production but instead to the chaotic breakdown and "decomposition"
of a secular social structure, the anarchic disordering of the
distinguishing characteristics of the slave-based mode of production as
social-form, prior to its industrial restructuration after 1848.[^40]

Such chaotic mutations and anomalies of the transition from slavery to
capitalism are the stuff of the historical record. To make sense of them
requires—beyond the mere registration and cumulative narration of their
phenomenal appearance scattered across the archival records—the clear
conceptual distinction between two modes of production that Marx
developed across the three volumes of *Capital*, such that these
incongruous and inconsistent *facts* might be subject to an analytical
measure: if a well-off "slave" who employs his "master" for a wage to
make from this labor a profit is perhaps not yet a capitalist, prior to
gaining the legal entitlements of abolition, he no longer, beyond any
doubt, functions socially and economically as a slave.

While much has been written on the relation of slavery and capitalism,
the question has arguably never been addressed in terms adequate to
Marx’s categorial, structural analysis in *Capital.*[^41] The place to
begin such a value-form analysis of the slavery and capitalist modes of
production remains Etienne Balibar’s brilliant, foundational essay in
which he develops for the concept of *mode of production* the structural
reading of *Capital* initiated by Louis Althusser in their famous 1965
collaboration *Reading Capital*.[^42] Though Balibar does not discuss
slavery as a mode of production prior to capitalism, the key factors in
the transition to capitalism he identifies in *Capital* can be readily
applied to the preceding analysis of slavery in Marx’s conceptual
system.

The central analytical assertion of Balibar’s complex, book-length
chapter is, from this perspective, that the primary condition for the
existence of the capitalist mode of production is a two-part legal
distinction, "the basic elements of which are the *law of property* and
the *law of contract.*" Under the capitalist mode of production, this
division takes the form of a primary distinction between, firstly, the
"*abstract universalistic character*…of *human persons*"’ who are
entitled to enter into *contractual* relations (i.e., between the
capitalist owner of the means of production and wage labor), and, on the
other hand, the *property* relation that "is established exclusively
between human persons and things (or what are *reputed* to be persons
and what are *reputed* to be things)." "This system simply distributes,"
Balibar observes, "the concrete beings which can support its functions
into two categories within each of which there is no pertinent
distinction from the legal point of view."[^43]

While Balibar is here discussing only capitalism, it is immediately
obvious that this criterion constitutes the founding, enabling
distinction between slavery and capitalism as modes of production: if
capitalism distinguishes between the "abstract universalistic character"
of human persons as subjects of right (of the universal, inalienable
right to the property of one’s self-same person, as well as to the
corresponding, temporally limited right to sell and purchase the
commodity labor power), the legal system subtending slavery knows no
such abstract universality. Under slavery, some human persons are
rights-bearers legally entitled to enter into contracts with other
property owners (to buy and sell slaves and other means of production),
while other human persons (slaves) are considered property, disentitled
from entering into legal contracts, subject to the purchase and use of
their entire person as property. Balibar’s analysis thus offers a formal
definition of the discrete distinction differentiating these two modes
of production, as opposed to any linear criterion of degree or relative
extension. It constitutes a clear and distinct criterion (possessing, to
be sure, manifold subdistinctions and limitations such as those to be
found in the Code Noir), one that serves analytically to contrast in the
absolute two distinct modes of production. [^44]

This founding *legal* distinction then allows for Balibar’s subsequent
analysis of the key internal factors composing and distinguishing the
capitalist mode of production itself.[^45] In a penetrating critique of
the traditional Marxist notion of the development of the forces of
production, Balibar argues that the development of the capitalist mode
of production, when understood analytically rather than empirically, is
radically discontinuous rather than linear and cumulative.[^46] In fact,
he argues, the so-called "productive forces are not ‘things’ at all, but
are instead to be conceived as a *relation* constituted by a pattern of
arrangement and temporal ‘rhythm’ distinctive to the capitalist mode of
production."[^47]

Balibar derives the nature of this "arrangement" from Marx’s
presentation of the concept of relative surplus value in three central
chapters of *Capital*, volume 1, specifically, those focused on the
contrasting modes of production Marx names manufacture and large-scale
industry.[^48] The essential transition from precapitalist manufacture
to capitalist industry, in this view, does not consist in a gradual
increase in scale and degree of co-operation, since both manufacture and
industrial production require a complex division of labor that
distinguishes them together from traditional handicraft (see fig.
3).[^49]

{% include image.html
    img="issue03/nesbitt-3.jpg"
    title='&quot;Aiguillier,&quot; from Diderot et al., *Encyclopédie*, vol. 1, plates.'
    caption='Figure 3. &quot;Aiguillier,&quot; from Diderot et al., *Encyclopédie*, vol. 1, plates.' %}

Instead, the crucial analytical distinction (and this will prove key as
well, I will argue below, to distinguish the often highly developed
forms of manufacture in plantation slavery from industrial capitalism)
is that all the various "fractional operations" in the diverse, less-
and more-complexly divided processes of manufacture—as with handicraft
production—are still performed *manually*, through the manual
manipulation, that is to say, of various tools by laborers.[^50] The
analytical unity of handicraft and manufacture as modalities of the
manual manipulation of tools constitutes, therefore, the element
founding their common distinction from the capitalist (industrial) mode
of production (fig. 4).

{% include image.html
    img="issue03/nesbitt-4.jpg"
    title='&quot;Aiguillier (detail),&quot; from Diderot et al.,
    *Encyclopédie*, vol. 1, plates.'
    caption='Figure 4. &quot;Aiguillier (detail),&quot; from Diderot et al.,
    *Encyclopédie*, vol. 1, plates.'
    url="http://www.slaveryimages.org/details.php?categorynum=7&categoryName=New%20World%20Agriculture%20and%20Plantation%20Labor&theRecord=35&recordCount=114"
%}

In other words, handicraft and manufacture (including plantation
slavery), distinguished only by their various *degrees* of division of
labor, nonetheless consist in a more basic unity as modes of production
in which living labor directly manipulates tools in the production
process (see fig. 5).

{% include image.html
    img="issue03/nesbitt-5.jpg"
    title='&quot;Récolte de l’indigo,&quot; from José Mariano da Conceição Velloso, *O fazendeiro do Brazil, cultivador* (Lisbon, 1806), vol. 2, plate 1, foldout following 341. Copy in the John Carter Brown Library, Brown University.'
    caption='Figure 5. &quot;Récolte de l’indigo,&quot; from José Mariano da Conceição Velloso, *O fazendeiro do Brazil, cultivador* (Lisbon, 1806), vol. 2, plate 1, foldout following 341. Copy in the John Carter Brown Library, Brown University.' %}

The gradual, cumulative increases in productivity observable in the
transition from handicraft to manufacture derive from the
rationalization process applied to each element of a given production
process; rather than a rupture, Balibar writes, the passage from
handicraft to manufacture thus occurs as a continuous "extension of the
analytical movement of specialization peculiar to handicrafts, a
movement which simultaneously affects both the perfection of technical
operations and the psychophysical characteristics of the workers’
labour-power. These are merely two aspects, two faces of one and the
same development. Indeed, *manufacture is merely the extreme
radicalization of the distinctive feature of handicrafts: the unity of
labour-power and means of labour*."[^51] The tendencies of scale,
concentration, and division of labor observable in the plantation
production processes of St. Domingue, characteristics that James names
"proletarian," are, I would argue, analogous to the developments in Adam
Smith’s pin manufactures, inherent, that is to say, to "manufacture"
rather than "large-scale industry" (in Marx’s sense of the terms).

In contrast, Balibar argues, the crucial distinguishing shift from
manufacture to fully capitalist industrial production is the suppression
of the anthropological function of living labor as "tool-bearer" (see
fig. 6).

{% include image.html
    img="issue03/nesbitt-6.png"
    title='&quot;Intérieur de la Sucrerie de betteraves de Château Freyes, près de Villeneuve-St.-Georges,&quot; *L’Ilustration Journal Universel*, 13 May 1843.'
    caption='Figure 6. &quot;Intérieur de la Sucrerie de betteraves de Château Freyes, près de Villeneuve-St.-Georges,&quot; *L’Ilustration Journal Universel*, 13 May 1843.' %}

The introduction of machinery and mechanized production suppresses the
direct contact of labor with the object of labor (the commodity), and an
entirely distinct criterion for the development of the production
process replaces the (analytically) previous division and specialization
of living labor via its manual manipulation of tools.[^52] In its place,
development under industrial production occurs as the tendential
replacement and *elimination* of manual labor by machine production. Not
only is production henceforth organized independently from the
anthropological characteristics of human labor power and its
rationalization, but development furthermore occurs as a separation of
living labor from the means of labor (i.e., machines).[^53]

Instead of the unity of living labor and the means of labor (tools)
characteristic of handicrafts and manufacture, an entirely distinct
structural unity takes its place: "The unity of the means of labor and
the object of labor."[^54] Crucially, it is not the *historical*
introduction of machine tools such as the steam engine that is at issue
in Marx’s categorial analysis (though of course he notes these empirical
phenomena in passing) but the *theoretical expression* of this
dislocation as the succession of two *forms of relation* characteristic
of handicrafts/manufacture versus industry, a displacement, that is to
say, from (1) the unity of the means of labor (tools) and living labor
to (2) an entirely distinct unity of the means of labor (machines) and
the object of labor (commodities).[^55]

This displacement, analytically rather than empirically apprehended,
entails, Balibar concludes,

> a reorganization of the entire system, of the relation of the real
> appropriation of nature, of the "productive forces."…The machine which
> replaces the ensemble of tools and educated, specialized labor-power
> is in no way a product of the development of that ensemble. It
> replaces the previous system by a different system: the continuity is
> not that of elements or individuals, but of functions.…The subject of
> development is nothing but what is defined by the succession of the
> forms of organization of labour."[^56]

The point to be taken from this excursus on the structural logic of the
capitalist mode of production is not merely that the displacement of
plantation slavery by industrial capitalism is not to be understood, as
James argues, as a gradual, linear process of complexification of the
division of labor and numerical expansion of its labor force
(historically real but irrelevant factors, in this view, in
distinguishing these two modes of production).[^57] Moreover, in the
terms of Marx’s categorial analysis, this distinction can only be
adequately apprehended analytically, as a discrete *displacement* from
one relation of factors to another.[^58]

Such an analysis ultimately points, then, to the inherent *necessity* of
this displacement as industrial capitalism and the value-form became the
predominant structural logic of Atlantic societies. One of the principal
conclusions Marx drew from his critique of political economy is that
capital attains its fully developed form only with the real subsumption
of labor and the predominance of the extraction of relative rather than
absolute forms of surplus value—a process manifest historically as the
supplanting of manual labor by automatic machinery.[^59] From this it is
clear that the manual manipulation of tools by slaves, like the use of
horses, mules, and wind power—no matter what the degree of division of
labor, accumulation of labor power, or intensity and rate of
production—must be displaced by machinic, automated production processes
subject to continuous revolutions in productivity, in order to realize
the inherently infinite demand of capital for ceaseless increases of
surplus value. This is to say, that the living labor of horses, mules,
and slaves can be pushed only to certain absolute limits in intensity
and duration of the working day (what Marx termed the extraction of
*absolute* surplus value); the elimination of animal labor, and the
displacement of living human (slave) labor that Marx and Balibar
describe, are in this view essential, necessary moments in the
development of capitalism to its fully adequate, industrial form.

More than mere semantics, the debate over the relation of plantation
slavery to the rise of capitalism remains in question today.[^60] In
their unparalleled originality and critical force, both Marx’s *Capital*
and James’s *The Black Jacobins* remain as relevant as ever to this
discussion. If James was arguably less engaged in the systematic
critique of capitalism than its revolutionary overthrow across the
global south, to read these two texts together can provoke a
multiplication of their analytical and rhetorical powers.

As such, the preceding analysis implies that the entire debate over the
transition from slavery to capitalism since Eric Williams, whether for
or against and for all its real historical insights, has been in a
certain sense misguided. This is arguably so insofar as the a priori
question at stake—whether the wealth produced by plantation slavery
enabled the initiation of and transition to capitalism—is incapable of
furnishing an adequate response to the debate. The production of various
forms of wealth and their social distribution is a transhistorical
anthropological constant, as such irrelevant to the distinction between
these two social forms. Wealth, moreover, is a mere superficial form of
appearance of capital, Marx argues, incapable of accounting in its
quantification for the analytical and historical distinction between
these two modes of production. To argue otherwise is to reject the most
basic insights of Marx’s critique—of so-called primitive accumulation
and the basic distinction between the dual forms of value (use-value and
exchange-value) and of labor (living-labor and abstract)—and to revert
to mere left Ricardianism. It is to assert the mere negative flipside of
the tired myth of primitive accumulation: in the place of the good,
Calvinist protocapitalists saving and reinvesting their profits to
jumpstart industrial capitalism, one instead blames or exculpates the
bad slave owners. Primitive accumulation, Marx showed, addressed instead
the forcible, often violent replacement of one juridical structure and
accompanying mode of production with another. 

The slaves of St. Domingue were no proletariat in the modern senses Marx
has given the term. Plantation slavery certainly contributed enormous
wealth to the Atlantic North, wealth that allowed for the imposition of
the capitalist social form, but in itself it did not constitute a form
of primitive accumulation and remained till its destruction analytically
distinct from the industrial capitalist mode of production. Slavery in
St. Domingue was modern, all too modern, only in the scale of its
dehumanizing brutality and violence.

C. L. R. James was among the most original writers and thinkers of
revolutionary Marxism. Decades ahead of his time, he drew the
consequences of his penetrating historical analyses of the Haitian and
Bolshevik Revolutions to argue that African Americans constituted a
revolutionary class; as he wrote in a 1939 resolution to the Socialist
Worker’s Party, African Americans "are designated by their whole
historical past to be, under adequate leadership, the very vanguard of
the proletarian revolution."[^61] While James was a radically inventive
and visionary political thinker, he analyzed and presented the problem
of the transition from feudalism and plantation slavery to industrial
capitalism not via Marx’s structural analysis of the forms, factors, and
tendencies of the capitalist mode of production, but in vital,
politico-historical terms: "What are the decisive dates in the modern
history of Great Britain, France, and America? 1789, the beginning of
the French Revolution; 1832, the passing of the Reform Bill in Britain;
and 1865, the crushing of the slave-power in America by the Northern
states. Each of these dates marks a definitive stage in the transition
from feudal to capitalist society."[^62] When James did speak of the
"scientific" analysis of history, as, for example, in his 1940 article
"Trotsky’s Place in History," he did so as an affirmation of an
empiricist methodology: "Trotsky claimed and irrefutably demonstrated
that his history was scientific in that it flowed from the objective
facts. He challenged anyone to question his documentation."[^63]

For all the immense accomplishments of Trotsky’s and James’s famous
works, they remain linear, narrative histories of the events they
present, entirely distinct, methodologically and analytically, from
Marx’s categorial presentation of the underlying social forms,
relations, and structures of the capitalist mode of production. For the
most part, the aims and accomplishments of *The Black Jacobins* and
*Capital* remain entirely distinct. The specific problem of the
transition from feudal slavery to capitalism is arguably, however,
impossible to adequately treat from the perspective of a linear
narrative description of a political history that James adopts, and
demands instead Marx’s properly scientific mode of analysis and his
narrative presentation of a conceptual logic in a discursive form
utterly distinct from the linearity of historiographic inquiry.[^64]
What is more, the logic of *Capital* itself must be conceived differentially, as a
dominant order of logical exposition (of the value-form) in
overdetermined tension with other, heterogeneous orders that "interrupt
and cut across the first," delimiting and marking off the contingent
necessity of Marx’s analytical focalization on the social logic of
valorization.[^65]

The unparalleled brilliance of *The Black Jacobins* lies elsewhere.

As James was the first to show, the black Jacobins of the Haitian
Revolution were, if anything, even more modern, more radically,
uncompromisingly modern than the Robespierreist French Jacobins who
initiated the destruction of late feudalism and the world-historical
imposition of justice as equality.[^66] James’s history of their
unyielding will to destroy slavery and to impose, by any means
necessary, universal emancipation from its misery remains one of the
great narrative analyses of leftist revolutionary history, equaled in
originality of insight and rhetorical force perhaps only by Marx’s own
1871 visionary history of the Commune and the incipient actuality of
communism, *The Civil War in France.*

To pair James and Marx is not to play one off against the other in a
zero-sum critical ploy but rather to initiate, productively, a more
complexly wrought interrogation of the transition from slavery to
capitalism, one in which the analysis of these two discrete modes of
production enables a more encompassing critique of the discrepant
multiplicity of any mode of production in transition. Transition, in
this view, is not to be grasped as the idealist metamorphosis of the
structure (the structure is, as Marx famously said, not the materialist
real itself but its *reproduction* as a
"thought-concrete" \[*Gedankenkonkretum*\]).[^67] Instead, the preceding
analysis can hope to initiate consideration of transition as the complex
"recombination of elements" in what Althusser famously named *décalage*,
or noncorrespondence, the historical passage between the various
divergent forms and temporalities of the legal, economic, productive and
reproductive, racial, gendered, and political components of the
historical transition from slavery to capitalism.

---

[^1]: C. L. R. James, *The Black Jacobins: Toussaint L’Ouverture and the
    San Domingo Revolution* (1938; repr., New York: Vintage, 1989),
    85–86.

[^2]: C. L. R. James, *World Revolution, 1917–1936: The Rise and Fall of
    the Communist International*, ed. Christian Høgsbjerg (1937; repr.,
    Durham, NC: Duke University Press, 2017). See, in particular,
    Høgsbjerg’s meticulous and illuminating introduction to this recent
    republication of one of James’s most important books. On James’s
    inspiration, see Leon Trotsky, *History of the Russian Revolution*,
    trans. Max Eastman, 3 vols. (Ann Arbor: University of Michigan
    Press, 1932). On James’s Marxism, see Scott McLemee and Paul Le
    Blanc, eds., *C. L. R. James and Revolutionary Marxism: Selected
    Writings of C. L. R. James, 1939–1949* (1994; repr., Chicago:
    Haymarket, 2018).

[^3]: See Robert J. C. Young, *Postcolonialism: An Historical
    Introduction* (London: Blackwell, 2016). Young analyzes the founding
    role of Leninist internationalism in the rise of anticolonialism
    after 1917, a phenomenon he terms "Tricontinentalism" and of which
    James is among the most eminent representatives.

[^4]: This is a question that I raised in a previous essay, without
    adequately formulating an answer; see Nick Nesbitt, "Fragments of a
    Universal History," in Charles Forsdick and Christian Høgsbjorg,
    eds., *The Black Jacobins Reader* (Durham, NC: Duke University
    Press, 2017), 141–42.

[^5]: See James, *The Black Jacobins*, 283, 284. This is the case as
    well with the single other extensive reference to the proletariat in
    *The Black Jacobins*, the memorable passage from the 1963 appendix,
    "From Toussaint Louverture to Fidel Castro," that echoes the initial
    formulation I have cited. In his 1963 revision, James underscores
    the transformative force of "the large-scale agriculture of the
    sugar plantation, which was a modern system": "It further required
    that the slaves live together in a social relation far closer than
    any proletariat of the time. The cane when reaped had to be rapidly
    transported to what was factory production.…The Negroes, therefore,
    from the very start lived a life that was in its essence a modern
    life" (392). In comparison with the earlier passage I am
    considering, here James reiterates the conclusion he had first drawn
    in 1938 from this proto-industrial form of the plantation, repeating
    the original terms of his argument: the defining characteristics of
    the proletarian condition are again summarized as (1) the
    "large-scale" of production processes, (2) the rapid internal
    distribution of raw materials to "factory production," and (3) the
    intensive proximity of living conditions. In the absence of any more
    explicit definition of the term, I would argue that *proletariat* is
    for James, writing in 1963, simply to be equated with a
    transhistorical notion of the exploited laborer and laboring
    *masses* (a term far more common in *The Black Jacobins* than
    *proletariat*).

[^6]: Selma James interprets this passage differently, writing that C.
    L. R. James rejected "rigid definitions of class," celebrating his
    precocious and probing examination of the "question of how to define
    who is working class." Selma James, "The Black Jacobins, Past and
    Present," in Forsdick and Høgsbjorg, *The Black Jacobins Reader*,
    76.

[^7]: Karl Marx, *Capital: A Critique of Political Economy*, vol. 1,
    *The Process of Production of Capital*, trans. Ben Fowkes (New York:
    Penguin, 1976); originally published as *Das Kapital: Kritik der
    politischen Oekonomie* in 1867. After Marx’s death in 1883, volumes
    2 and 3 were prepared by Friedrich Engels from Marx’s notes and were
    published in 1885 and 1894, respectively. On "manufacture," see vol.
    1, chap. 14.

[^8]: See Eric Williams, *Capitalism and Slavery* (1944; repr., Chapel
    Hill: University of North Carolina Press, 1994); and Robin
    Blackburn, *The Overthrow of Colonial Slavery: 1776–1848* (1988;
    repr., New York: Verso, 2011). The key intertext to *The Black
    Jacobins* in this respect is undoubtedly W. E. B. Dubois’s 1935
    *Black Reconstruction in America*, in which Dubois writes—with
    militant, lyrical force fully the equal of James’s—of a complex
    dialectic between white and black "proletariats," identifying
    therein a violently repressed and historically disavowed tendency
    toward "a democracy which should by universal suffrage establish a
    dictatorship of the proletariat ending in industrial democracy." W.
    E. B. Dubois, *Black Reconstruction in America* (1935; repr.,
    Oxford: Oxford University Press, 2017), ix. James discusses the
    importance of Dubois’s *Black Reconstruction* in his "The Revolution
    in Theory" (1977), in Forsdick and Høgsbjorg, *The Black Jacobins
    Reader*, 363.

[^9]: James’s *World Revolution* is redolent with references to "the
    dictatorship of the proletariat" (100, 103, 105); "the
    petty-bourgeoisie and the proletariat" (84); "the revolutionary
    proletariat" (106); "the Russian proletariat" (122); "the
    international proletariat" (124); "the Socialist proletariat" (163);
    "the advanced proletariat" (232); "the great German proletariat"
    (312); and so on. While the many deployments of the concept in
    *World Revolution* clearly serve to drive home the revolutionary,
    Trotskyist argument of James’s history, the fact that James thought
    it unnecessary to define the term with any specificity in 1937 is
    nonetheless undoubtedly symptomatic, in the full Althusserian sense
    of the term. Symptomatic, that is to say, of what is arguably a
    traditional, Leninist interpretation of Marx and *Capital* more
    specifically as a critique made from the standpoint of labor rather
    than that of capitalism as a social totality. On the latter, see
    Moishe Postone, *Time, Labor, and Social Domination: A
    Reinterpretation of Marx’s Critical Theory* (Cambridge: Cambridge
    University Press, 1993). James’s critique of global capitalist
    imperialism, for all its brilliance, arguably remained a political
    critique of class-based exploitation that rarely if ever drew on the
    theoretical insights of Marx’s categorial critique of political
    economy. James will write in this vein, in his 1944 essay "The
    American People in ‘One World,’" that "the laws of dialectics are to
    be traced not in metaphysical abstractions…but in economic
    development and the rise, maturity, and decline of different social
    classes within the expansion and constriction of the capitalist
    world market" (McLemee and Le Blanc, *C. L. R. James and
    Revolutionary Marxism*, 175). On James’s original appropriation of
    traditional, Leninist-humanist Marxism, which Anthony Bogues terms
    "black Marxism," see Anthony Bogues, *Caliban’s Freedom: The Early
    Political Thought of C. L. R. James* (Chicago: Pluto, 1997), 6–9; on
    the original and precocious brand of Marxist humanism developed by
    the Johnson-Forrest Tendency, see 69–75: "We \[the members of the
    Johnson-Forrest Tendency\] were convinced on a re-examination of
    Marx’s capital \[*sic*\]," observed James in 1947, "that the
    solution to the economic ills of capitalism was the human solution"
    (qtd. on 75).

[^10]: James, *World Revolution*, 70.

[^11]: Ibid., 78–79.

[^12]: On Marx’s concept of absolute surplus value, see *Capital*, vol.
    1, section 3, "The Production of Absolute Surplus-Value."

[^13]: Unsurprisingly, James appears to have read the three volumes of
    *Capital* intensively, though not until well after the composition
    of *World Revolution* and *The Black Jacobins*. James thus asserted
    in a 1939 letter to Constance Webb his intention to study in its
    entirety Marx’s magnum opus: "And now for *Das Kapital*. My dear
    young woman, I have some news for you. One CLR James, reported
    marxist having thought over his past life and future prospects,
    decided that what he needed was a severe and laborious study of?
    guess! The Bible? Wrong. Ferdinand the Bull? Wrong again. Not *Das
    Kapital*? Right. I shall do these three volumes and nothing will
    stop me but a revolution" (qtd. in Bogues, *Caliban’s Freedom*, 53).
    Despite this familiarity, and in contrast to his extensive
    commentaries on Marx’s *1844 Manuscripts* and Hegel’s *Science of
    Logic*, texts that he critiqued intensively with Raya Dunayevskaya
    and the other members of the Johnson-Forrest Tendency, James never
    seems to have undertaken a similar critical appraisal of Marx’s
    *Capital*. The one exception is his 1967 talk "Marx’s *Capital*, the
    Working-day, and Capitalist Production," in which James discusses
    not the concept of labor power or the capitalist mode of production
    (concepts at issue in the present essay) but chapter 10 of
    *Capital*, vol. 1, on the lived experience of class struggle over
    the duration of the working day: "\[Marx\] is concerned with what is
    happening to members of the working-class as living human beings in
    a factory." C. L. R. James, *You Don’t Play with Revolution: The
    Montreal Lectures of C. L. R. James*, ed. David Austen (Edinburgh:
    AK, 2009), 151. It is in any case certain that a central dimension
    of the intellectual project of the Johnson-Forrest Tendency in the
    1940s involved a close reading of Marx’s *Capital*, a reading the
    group brought to bear against their corresponding intensive
    study of Hegel’s *Logic*. Grace Lee Boggs observed in 1947, "As soon
    as C. L. R. discovered that I could read German and had studied
    Hegel, he had me translating sections of *Das Kapital* and comparing
    the structure of capital with Hegel’s logic" (qtd. in Bogues,
    *Caliban’s Freedom*, 60).

[^14]: Marx, *Capital*, 1:743. With similar vagueness, in *Theories of
    Surplus-Value* (written in 1863 but initially projected as vol. 4 of
    *Capital*), Marx writes, "Malthus defends the interests of the
    industrial bourgeoisie only in so far as these are identical with
    the interests of landed property, of the aristocracy, i.e., against
    the mass of the people, the proletariat" (chap. 9.1; emphasis mine).
    See
    <https://www.marxists.org/archive/marx/works/download/epub/capital-v4.epub>.

[^15]: Karl Marx and Friedrich Engels, *Manifesto of the Communist
    Party*, ed. Terrel Carver (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press,
    1996), 30.

[^16]: Le Robert, *Dictionnaire historique de la langue française*
    (2018), s.v. "prolétariat."

[^17]: Two of Marx’s many citations gleaned from Capital, vol. 1: "One
    might almost say that modern society lives at the expense of the
    proletarians, on the portion of the wages of labour which it
    withdraws from their pockets" (Sismondi, qtd. on 207); "The
    proletarian, by selling his labour for a definite quantity of the
    means of subsistence (*approvisionnement*), renounces all claim to a
    share in the product" (Charbuliez, qtd. on 718). J. C. L. Simonde de
    Sismondi, *Études sur l’économie politique*, vol. 1 (Bruxelles:
    Société Typographique Belge, 1837), 1:24; Antoine-Elisée Charbuliez,
    *Richesse ou pauvreté* (Paris: A. Le Gallois, 1841), 14.

[^18]: That one finds in *Capital* differing, even contradictory, uses and
    definitions of the concept *proletariat* is not surprising, given
    the often rough and unfinished nature of its three volumes. While it
    is well known that after Marx’s death, Engels constructed volumes 2
    and 3 for publication from various drafts Marx left in his papers,
    even volume 1—the publication of which Marx oversaw through its
    second, revised German edition and first French translation
    (1872–75)—bears no final form; Marx intended and made notes for a
    further complete revision of it in 1881 (which he never carried
    out). What we know as volume 1 is a bricolage Engels made of the
    second German edition of 1872 and the French edition of 1872–75.
    While the first draft of volume 1 from 1863 is lost (the
    *Grundrisse* of 1857–58 is not, properly speaking, a draft of
    *Capital* but a mass of preparatory notes that Marx termed an
    "inquiry" \[*Forschungsweise*\]), the first German edition of 1867
    as well as Marx’s notes for his intended 1881 revision contain many
    important formulations and developments of his demonstration (in
    particular, a radically different presentation of the key first
    chapter on the value-form) absent from Engels’s posthumous
    "definitive edition." In fact, attention to the totality of Marx’s
    drafts, notebooks, and letters from 1857 to 1881, gradually becoming
    available in the definitive MEGA^2^ edition of Marx and Engels’s
    works, leads to the conclusion, in Michael Heinrich’s words, that
    "in a strict sense, a three-volume work ‘Capital’ written by Marx
    does not really exist.…There is no clear difference between drafts
    and the final work—we have only differently developed drafts of a
    shifting, unfinished and incomplete project." Michael Heinrich,
    "Reconstruction or Deconstruction? Methodological Controversies
    about Value and Capital, and New Insights from the Critical
    Edition," in Riccardo Bellofiore and Roberto Finneschi, eds.,
    *Re-reading Marx: New Perspectives after the Critical Edition*
    (London: Palgrave, 2009), 96. If, as Heinrich shows, it is the case
    that these various iterations of Marx’s project reveal distinct and
    ambivalent understandings of such key concepts as "value" and
    "labor-power," it is hardly surprising that this should be the case
    for concepts of lesser importance to Marx’s categorial critique,
    such as "proletariat." Moreover, here I am only considering the
    standard English edition of *Capital*, vols. 1–3. Undoubtedly, there
    remain to be discovered further variations in Marx’s
    conceptualization of the "proletariat" in the voluminous editions,
    drafts, correspondence, and notes of the MEGA^2^.

[^19]: "The other classes decay and disappear in the face of large-scale
    industry, the proletariat is its most characteristic product" (Marx,
    *Capital*, 1:930).

[^20]: "The workers have been turned into proletarians, and their means
    of labour into capital, as soon as the capitalist mode of production
    stands on its own feet" (Marx, *Capital*, 1:928).

[^21]: Marx, *Capital*, 1:764n1. By "Roscherian fancy," Marx is
    referring to Wilhelm Roscher, author of the 1858 volume *Die
    Grundlagen der Nationalökonomie*.

[^22]: Adding to our uncertainty, Marx at one point even seems to
    distinguish this "free" proletarian from wage labor—in time, space,
    and nature: "We have considered the forcible creation of a class of
    free and rightless proletarians, the bloody discipline that turned
    them into wage-labourers" (*Capital*, 1:905).

[^23]: Marx, *Capital*, 1:896. Marx’s famous historical example is that
    of the Scottish Crofters, the dispossession of whom created a labor
    "reserve army," one willing and indeed forced subsequently to take
    on wage labor for their very survival. Similarly, he writes of the
    Italian case: "In Italy, where capitalist production developed
    earliest, the dissolution of serfdom also took place earlier than
    elsewhere. There the serf was emancipated before he had acquired any
    prescriptive right to the soil. His emancipation at once transformed
    him into a ‘free’ proletarian, without any legal rights, and he
    found a master ready and waiting for him in the towns" (*Capital*,
    1:876). On the centrality of such transformations of property rights
    for the imposition of capitalism, see Ellen Meiksins Wood, *The
    Origin of Capitalism: A Longer View* (1999; repr., New York: Verso,
    2017). Wood argues convincingly that the essential factor in the
    imposition of capitalism as a social form is the transformation of
    property rights. More specifically, this transformation made
    inaccessible to the impoverished classes (such as the Scottish
    Crofters) the basic amenities essential for survival, such as food
    and shelter. Cast out by the Scottish Lords from their secular
    homesteads as rightless, "free" proletarians (in Marx’s example),
    they were forced to accept the contractual conditions of capitalist
    wage labor in, for example, the Glasgow shipyards in order to
    purchase the means of survival and their reproduction on the market
    with these wages.

[^24]: Marx, *Capital*, 1:897.

[^25]: On the 1790s Les Cayes Maroon communes, see Carolyn Fick, *The
    Making of Haiti: The Saint-Domingue Revolution from Below*
    (Knoxville: University of Tennessee Press, 1990). In terms perfectly
    coherent with Marx’s analysis of primitive accumulation, Rosamunde
    Renard describes this historical process in post-1848 Martinique and
    Guadeloupe, where the commodification of the basic means of survival
    and reproduction (along with the imposition of various mandatory
    taxes and employment requirements) effectively forced former slaves
    (despite various and unrelenting resistance) to accept the new
    conditions of contractual wage labor on the plantations: "Those
    ex-slaves who continued to do plantation work did not do so
    voluntarily in many instances. The ex-slaves incurred expenses
    unknown to the slave. Food, medical bills, clothing, rents—all
    wholly or partly supplied by the plantation before emancipation—were
    now their personal responsibility. Moreover the plantocracy and the
    administration increased these expenses even more in the attempt to
    create an artificial need for money wages so that the blacks would
    be forced to work on the plantations." Rosamunde Renard, "Labor
    Relations in Martinique and Guadeloupe, 1848–1870," *Journal of
    Caribbean History* 26, no. 1 (1992): 39.

[^26]: To further develop this argument, the distinction I am presenting
    between James’s linear, developmental understanding of the relation
    of slavery to capitalism and Marx’s binary, either/or analysis of
    the concept of mode of production should be confronted as well with
    James’s appropriation of Trotsky’s notion of combined and uneven
    development. In this view, plantation slavery would constitute not a
    barbaric remnant but a variegated element in the overdetermined
    complex of Atlantic modernity. Such a view, however (and this is the
    point of the present analysis), by simply positing "slavery" as a
    differential element within an equally underdefined totality
    ("capitalist modernity"), continues to put forth the question of the
    precise, adequate analytical distinction between slavery and
    capitalism. On James’s appropriation and deployment of Trotsky’s
    concept of combined and uneven development, see Bill Schwarz, "Haiti
    and Historical Time," in Forsdick and Høgsbjorg, "The Black
    Jacobins" Reader, 99–102. On uneven development, see Bruno Bosteels,
    "Reading Capital from the Margins: Notes on the Logic of Uneven
    Development," in Nick Nesbitt, ed., *The Concept in Crisis: Reading
    "Capital" Today* (Durham, NC: Duke University Press, 2017), 113–65.

[^27]: The famous chapters on primitive accumulation are the exception
    that proves the rule, insofar as they are excurses to Marx’s object
    of analysis, placed precisely after volume 1’s analysis of the
    capitalist mode of production, despite the fact that historically
    the events they discuss occur prior to the development of capitalism
    in its high-industrial form.

[^28]: Marx, *Capital*, 1:327.

[^29]: Among the key theoretical distinctions Marx makes in his critique
    of political economy is that between the production of wealth (in
    the form of use values), exchange value (manifest in the form of
    prices), and value itself. This fundamental theoretical insight not
    only marks Marx’s decisive break with Ricardian value theory (Marx
    was not a Left Ricardian) but remained as well a distinction
    generally overlooked by the productivist orientation of traditional,
    Leninist Marxism such as that professed, in singular fashion, to be
    sure, by James. On this founding theoretical distinction of Marx’s
    critique—developed from the very first paragraph of *Capital*—and
    its invisibility in traditional Marxism, see Postone, *Time, Labor,
    and Social Domination*, 7–15. On the concept of Left Ricardianism—that is, the failure to clearly distinguish wealth from value and the consequent promotion of the redistribution of that wealth rather than the destruction of the capitalist mode of production—see Patrick Murray, "The Illusion of the Economic: The Trinity Formula and the ‘Religion of Everyday Life,’" in Martha Campbell and Geert Reuten, eds., *The Culmination of Capital: Essays on Volume III of Marx’s Capital* (New York: Palgrave 2002), 250–52.

[^30]: Quoted in Josette Fallope, *Esclaves et citoyens: Les noirs à la
    Guadeloupe au XIXe siècle* (Basse Terre: Société d’histoire de la
    Guadeloupe, 1992), 574 (all translations mine).

[^31]: Ibid., 593.

[^32]: Karl Marx, *Capital: A Critique of Political Economy*, vol. 2,
    *The Process of Circulation of Capital*, trans. David Fernbach (New
    York: Penguin, 1978), 554, 115. In volume 1 of Capital, Marx
    observes in this vein, "The slave-owner buys his worker in the same
    way as he buys his horse. If he loses his slave, he loses a piece of
    capital, which he must replace by fresh expenditure on the
    slave-market.…The slave is the property of a particular master; the
    worker \[in contrast\] must indeed sell himself to capital, but not
    to a particular capitalist, and so within certain limitations he may
    choose to sell himself to whomever he wishes; and he may also change
    his master" (1:377, 1032).

[^33]: On the development of qualitative management practices in New
    World slavery, see Caitlin Rosenthal, *Accounting for Slavery:
    Masters and Management* (Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press,
    2018); and Ian Baucom, *Specters of the Atlantic: Finance Capital,
    Slavery, and the Philosophy of History* (Durham, NC: Duke University
    Press, 2005).

[^34]: Marx, *Capital*, 2:118.

[^35]: On the crucial but complex and difficult distinction Marx makes
    throughout the three volumes of *Capital* between profits captured
    by any given capitalist firm—via competition—from a total global
    mass of surplus value and the actual production of surplus value by
    variable capital (i.e., living labor), see the writings of Fred
    Moseley, including *Money and Totality: A Macro-monetary
    Interpretation of Marx’s Logic in "Capital" and the End of the
    "Transformation Problem"* (Chicago: Haymarket, 2017).

[^36]: "In slave labour, even the part of the working day in which the
    slave is only replacing the value of his own means of subsistence,
    in which he therefore actually works for himself alone, appears as
    labour for his master. All his labour appears as unpaid labour. In
    wage-labour, on the contrary, even surplus labour, or unpaid labour,
    appears as paid. In the one case, the property-relation conceals the
    slave’s labour for himself; in the other case the money-relation
    conceals the uncompensated labour of the wage-labourer. We may
    therefore understand the decisive importance of the transformation
    of the value and price of labour-power into the form of wages, or
    into the value and price of labour itself" (Marx, *Capital*, 1:680).

[^37]: "When the former slave-owner engages his former slaves as paid
    workers, etc., then we find that what is happening is that
    production processes of varying social provenance have been
    transformed into capitalist production.…The slave ceases to be an
    instrument of production at the disposal of his owner." Marx,
    Capital, 1:1020. In volume 3 of Capital, Marx writes similarly,
    "Among other things, the capitalist mode of production is
    distinguished from the mode of production founded on slavery by the
    fact that the value or price of labour-power is expressed as the
    value or price of labour \[power\] itself, i.e. as wages." Karl
    Marx, *Capital: A Critique of Political Economy*, vol. 3, *The
    Process of Capitalist Production as a Whole*, trans. David Fernbach
    (New York: Penguin, 1981), 121.

[^38]: Karl Marx, *Grundrisse: Foundations of the Critique of Political
    Economy*, trans. Martin Nicolaus (1973; repr., New York: Penguin,
    1993), 223; see also 464. Marx embarks on extensive, if fragmentary,
    analyses of slavery and capitalism at various points in the
    *Grundrisse* notebooks: see 419–20, 464–69, 471–514, and 547–48.
    Marx closely observed the fight to abolish US slavery in the 1850s
    and 1860s and wrote detailed analyses of the North American struggle
    in many of his articles for the New York Daily Tribune—at the time
    the most widely distributed paper in the Atlantic world—even writing
    directly to Lincoln on behalf of the International Working Man’s
    Association to congratulate him on the victory in the Civil War. See
    Karl Marx, *Dispatches for the "New York Tribune": Selected
    Journalism of Karl Marx* (New York: Penguin, 2008). The 28 January
    1865 letter to Lincoln is available at
    <https://www.marxists.org/archive/marx/iwma/documents/1864/lincoln-letter.htm>.
    On the *Grundrisse*, see Nick Nesbitt, "The Grundrisse," in Jeff
    Diamanti, Andrew Pendakis, and Imre Szeman, eds., *The Bloomsbury
    Companion to Marx* (London: Bloomsbury, 2018).

[^39]: James in this vein makes a rare analytical commentary on the
    historical transformation of American slavery and its approximation
    to capitalism in the 1949 essay "Stalinism and Negro History": "In
    proportion as the export of cotton became of interest to the United,
    States, patriarchal slavery was, in the words of Marx, ‘drawn into
    the whirlpool of an international market dominated by the capitalist
    mode of production.’ The structure of production relations was
    thereby altered. By 1860 there were over 2,000 plantations each with
    over a hundred slaves. Division of labor increased. Slaves began to
    perform skilled labor, were hired out for wages. Slave production
    took on more and more the character of social labor." McLemee and Le
    Blanc, *C. L. R. James and Revolutionary Marxism*, 190. On the
    historical development of American slavery and capitalism, see
    Clavin Schermerhorn, *The Business of Slavery and the Rise of
    American Capitalism, 1815–1860* (New Haven, CT: Yale University
    Press, 2015).

[^40]: "On the plantation…near Basse Terre, it is not uncommon to see
    slaves pay a salary to freemen, and to employ them in the planting
    of their gardens. On the plantation Saint-Charles, most of the
    blacks are well-off; some among them live off their rents, paying
    others to work their land, even by freemen, and receive a regular
    income \[redevance\] from it." *Exposé général des résultats du
    patronage des esclaves des colonies françaises* (Paris: Impimerie
    Royale, 1844), 128; quoted in Fallope, *Esclaves et citoyens*, 596.
    On the economic, social, political, and historical decomposition of
    slavery in 1840s Guadeloupe, see 237–308.

[^41]: On the methodology of *Capital* as a form-based, categorial—as
    opposed to historical or empiricist—analysis of capitalism
    (specifically, as what Marx calls "value-form analysis"), see
    Postone, *Time, Labor, and Social Domination*, 123–44; Juan
    Iñigo-Carrera, "Method: From the *Grundrisse* to *Capital*," in
    Riccardo Bellofiore, Guido Starosta, and Peter D. Thomas, eds., *In
    Marx’s Laboratory: Critical Interpretations of the "Grundrisse"*
    (Chicago: Haymarket, 2014), 43–70; and Riccardo Bellofiore, "The
    Multiple Meanings of Marx’s Value Theory," *Monthly Review*, 1 April
    2018,
    <https://monthlyreview.org/2018/04/01/the-multiple-meanings-of-marxs-value-theory/>.

[^42]: Etienne Balibar, "On the Basic Concepts of Historical
    Materialism," in Louis Althusser, Jacques Rancière, Pierre Macherey,
    Roger Establet, and Etienne Balibar, *Reading Capital: The Complete
    Edition* (1965; repr., New York: Verso, 2017), 357–480. See also
    Nick Nesbitt, "Value as Symptom," in Nesbitt, *Concept in Crisis*,
    229–79. I would argue that while *Reading Capital* invents a whole
    range of singular concepts central to contemporary critical theory,
    its various chapters also initiate, in 1965, this now-dominant
    categorial or value-form reading of *Capital*, an approach to be
    found in theorists from Postone, Robert Kurz, Elena Louisa Lange,
    and Michael Heinrich to the outstanding series of publications of
    the members of the International Symposium on Marxist Theory
    (Bellofiore, Moseley, Tony Smith, et al.), and this despite the
    silent disavowal or even active hostility toward Althusser’s thought
    among the majority of these thinkers, a disavowal that is, I think,
    symptomatic, to redeploy Althusser’s famous term, rather than
    analytically coherent.

[^43]: Balibar, "On the Basic Concepts of Historical Materialism," 392
    (italics in original).

[^44]: The analytical apprehension of the criteria distinguishing
    slavery from industrial capitalism such as I am proposing here does
    not ignore, but in fact necessarily precedes and enables, the
    obviously more complicated problem of the actual historical
    transition between these two modes of production (in colonial
    France, globally, etc.). While such an examination lies beyond the
    scope of this essay, it might begin, as I suggested above regarding
    the 1848 abolition process, by addressing historically the
    implications of the temporal asynchronicity and overdetermined
    complexity posited in Balibar’s analysis of the problem of
    transition. See Alberto Toscano, "Transition Deprogrammed," *SAQ*
    113, no. 4 (2014): 761–75. For a rich account of the archival
    material describing the phenomenal unfolding of this transition in
    1840s Guadeloupe in its multiple dimensions (economic, political,
    social, moral, etc.), see Fallope, *Esclaves et citoyens*.

[^45]: Note that as with Marx’s *Capital* itself, the order of
    exposition of Balibar’s analysis is analytical rather than
    empiricist or historicist. To proceed from the enabling legal
    framework for the capitalist mode of production to the key factors
    whose particular arrangement determines its nature is to follow the
    logic of a structural presentation with no isomorphic relation to the
    historical, empirical supersession of capitalism over various
    precapitalist modes of production such as feudalism and plantation
    slavery.

[^46]: "Marx’s concept cannot be made to coincide with the categories of
    a sociology which, for its part, proceeds by the distribution and
    adding together of levels—the technological, the economic, the
    legal, the social, the psychological, the political, etc.—and bases
    its peculiar historical classifications on these distributions
    (traditional societies and industrial societies, liberal societies
    and centralized-totalitarian societies, etc.)" (Balibar, "On the
    Basic Concepts of Historical Materialism," 398).

[^47]: Ibid. (emphasis mine).

[^48]: Marx, *Capital*, vol. 1, chaps. 13–15.

[^49]: Adam Smith famously analyzed the development of the division of
    labor in manufacturing based on the example of pin manufacturing.
    See Adam Smith, *The Wealth of Nations* (1776; repr., New York:
    Penguin, 1999), 4–5.

[^50]: Balibar, "On the Basic Concepts of Historical Materialism," 401.

[^51]: Ibid., 402 (emphasis mine).

[^52]: This is the process Marx analyzes in the crucial chapter 15 of
    volume 1, "Machinery and Large-Scale Industry."

[^53]: Balibar, "On the Basic Concepts of Historical Materialism," 403.

[^54]: Balibar, "On the Basic Concepts of Historical Materialism," 403.
    "An organism of production," Balibar continues, "is now no longer
    the union of a certain number of workers, it is a set of fixed
    machines ready to receive any workers. From now on, ‘a technique’ is
    a set of certain materials and instruments of labour, linked
    together by a \[general, social\] knowledge of the physical
    properties of each of them, and of their properties as a system"
    (403).

[^55]: Ibid., 406. And so, Balibar concludes, "The movement from one
    form to the other can be completely analysed: not as the mere
    dissolution of a structure (the separation of the worker from the
    means of labour \[via so-called primitive accumulation\]), but as
    the transformation of one structure into another.…It is the forms of
    the labour process which have changed" (407; emphasis mine).

[^56]: Ibid., 407, 412. Balibar has recently offered an autocritique of
    the structural logic of modes of production developed in his seminal
    1965 text: "My own text in *Reading Capital* was—at least this is
    how I see it today—a perfect example of a blind alley into which a
    blind use of the concept of structure was directed." The object of
    Balibar’s self-criticism is what he now sees as an indiscriminate
    deployment of two contradictory senses of structure, that of the
    social formation as a "structured totality" possessing in any
    historical case a particular and characteristic "invariant,"
    combined with a contradictory attempt to think structure as "the
    description of the transformation from one figure to the second,"
    or, in other words, to articulate "the laws of the transformation"
    or transition between modes of production. In the present argument,
    needless to say, I do not fully accept Balibar’s autocritique, with
    the essential proviso that the analytical determination of the
    actually distinctive elements in such a comparison (legal, economic)
    do not constitute an end point but only the very beginning, a mere
    but essential prolegomenon to the examination of the complexly
    overdetermined and variegated phenomenon of the transition from
    plantation slavery to industrial capitalism. Etienne Balibar,
    "Theory and Politics in the Thought of Louis Althusser: An Interview
    with Etienne Balibar by Petr Kužel," 2017; courtesy of Petr Kužel.

[^57]: That American plantation slavery became increasingly productive
    of cotton due to various proto-Taylorist, rationalizing
    transformations in labor practices and their analysis in no way
    implies, in this light, that it consequently became increasingly
    "capitalist" in nature, as Rosenthal claims, since (in light of
    Rosenthal’s explicit refusal to offer a coherent definition of
    capitalism), in the terms of Marx’s analysis, the production of use
    values such as cotton, unlike surplus value, is a transhistorical
    anthropological practice in no way specific to capital (*Accounting
    for Slavery*, 5–6).

[^58]: "A scientific analysis…is possible only if we can grasp the inner
    nature of capital, just as the apparent motions of the heavenly
    bodies are intelligible only to someone who is acquainted with their
    real motions, which are not perceptible to the senses" (Marx,
    *Capital*, 1:433).

[^59]: "The production of relative surplus value completely
    revolutionizes the production process of labour and the groupings
    into which society is divided.…It then becomes the universal,
    socially predominant form of the production process" (Marx,
    *Capital*, 1:645–46). See also Postone, *Time, Labor, and Social
    Domination*, 283–84.

[^60]: See, for example, the excellent review article by Charles Post,
    "Slavery and the New History of Capitalism," *Catalyst* 1, no. 1
    (2017),
    <https://catalyst-journal.com/vol1/no1/slavery-capitalism-post>. See
    also Seymour Drescher, "Capitalism and Slavery after Fifty Years,"
    *Slavery and Abolition* 18, no. 3 (1997): 212–27.

[^61]: C. L. R. James, quoted in Paul Le Blanc, introduction to McLemee
    and Le Blanc, *C. L. R. James and Revolutionary Marxism*, 5. This is
    the primary conclusion James advances in his 1939 text "Revolution
    and the Negro," reproduced in the same text: "What we as Marxists
    have to see is the tremendous role played by Negroes in the
    transformation of Western civilization from feudalism to capitalism"
    (77). Similarly, in the 1948 essay "The Revolutionary Answer to the
    ‘Negro Problem’ in the United States," also reproduced in *C. L. R.
    James and Revolutionary Marxism*, James writes, "\[The\] independent
    Negro movement…is in itself a constituent part of the struggle for
    socialism.…The Negro people, we say, on the basis of their own
    experiences, approach the conclusions of Marxism" (180).

[^62]: James, "Revolution and the Negro," 78.

[^63]: C. L. R. James, "Trotsky’s Place in History," in McLemee and Le
    Blanc, *C. L. R. James and Revolutionary Marxism*, 123.

[^64]: "For all their limits," writes Alberto Toscano, "the
    semi-structuralist concepts forwarded by Balibar to ground Marx are
    substantial antidotes to a thinking of transition as a homogeneous
    ‘expressive’ totality in historical development" ("Transition
    Deprogrammed," 765).

[^65]: On this point, see Althusser’s long-neglected but essential
    reformulation of the problem of Marx’s methodology in his 1977
    preface to Gérard Duménil’s *Le concept de loi économique dans "Le
    Capital."* The preface, translated by G. M. Goshgarian, appears in
    *Rethinking Marxism* 30, no. 1 (2018): 4–24. While in this late text
    Althusser develops a brilliant interpretation of Marx’s methodology
    and the contingency of the latter’s analytical focus on valorization
    in *Capital*, this arguably culminates in Althusser’s problematic
    (not to say symptomatic) hypostatization of the categories "use value, labour productivity, and—class struggle! \[*sic*\]" as
    heterogeneous to, rather than constituted by, the logic and social
    demands of valorization (20). For all its brilliance, in other
    words, Althusser’s remains a critique from the standpoint of labor
    rather than a critique of (capitalist) labor per se. See also Fabio
    Bruschi, "Splitting Science: The Althusserian Interpretation of
    *Capital*’s Multiple Orders of Exposition," *Rethinking Marxism* 30,
    no. 1 (2018): 25–43.

[^66]: See Nick Nesbitt, *Universal Emancipation: The Haitian Revolution
    and the Radical Enlightenment* (Charlottesville: University of
    Virginia Press, 2008), and *Caribbean Critique: Antillean Critical
    Theory from Toussaint to Glissant* (Liverpool: Liverpool University
    Press, 2015), chap. 1.

[^67]: Marx, *Grundrisse*, 101. On Marx’s methodology and his essential
    distinction between the real object of analysis and its reproduction
    as a "thought-concrete" in the analysis of *Capital*, see Iñigo
    Carrera, "Method."
