---
layout: project
section: projects
title: 
  "long": "Mapping Marronage"
  "short": "Mapping Marronage"
doi: "https://doi.org/10.7916/archipelagos-ar70-sf84"
author: 
- name: Annette Joseph-Gabriel
  shortname: Joseph-Gabriel
  bio: >
    Annette Joseph-Gabriel is Assistant Professor of French and Francophone Studies at the University of Michigan, Ann Arbor. Her research focuses on race, gender, and citizenship in the French-speaking Caribbean, Africa, and France. Her book, *Reimagining Liberation: How Black Women Transformed Citizenship in the French Empire* (University of Illinois Press, 2020) mines published writings and untapped archives to reveal the anticolonialist endeavors of Black women in the French empire. She has published articles in peer-reviewed journals including *Small Axe, Slavery & Abolition, Eighteenth-Century Studies* and *The French Review*, and her public writings have been featured in Al Jazeera and HuffPost. She is a recipient of the Carrie Chapman Catt Prize for Research on Women and Politics. She is also the managing editor of *Palimpsest: A Journal on Women, Gender, and the Black International* and production editor of *Women in French Studies.*
date: December 2020
issue: 5
order: 6
image: images/issue05/mapping-marronage.png
thumb: images/issue05/mapping-marronage-thumb.png
link: "http://mapping-marronage.rll.lsa.umich.edu"
---

## *archipelagos* presents *Mapping Marronage*

At this stage in the evolution of the academy, the idea of decolonizing the historical record has become altogether commonplace --- at least in the context of postcolonial, Caribbean, Afro-diasporic, and Global South studies. The tools and methodologies via which to accomplish that lofty goal are, however, far from readily available. To be truly decolonial in our intellectual practice requires rewriting and rewiring the very terms of our engagements with archives; it requires investing labor and capital resources into actually refashioning the spaces we want to inhabit in our work. *Mapping Marronage* proposes just this sort of intervention. It is a project that presents archival materials in ways that privilege the diverse forms of fugitivity that enabled enslaved persons to refuse a colonial order based on containment, surveillance, and restraint. The below exchange highlights the site's provocative intentions and proposes additional suggestions for realizing its fantastic potential.


*archipelagos* review
---------------------

### Contribution

Insofar as the site ultimately grounds its archival claims in materials
from outside the site, the project’s specific contribution is
necessarily grounded in how it asks users to navigate archival materials
differently. The site points to the code base of Alex Gil and Kaiama L.
Glover’s mapping visualization [*In the Same
Boats*](http://sameboats.org/) as structural blueprint.[^2] While the
*Same Boats* (*SB*) interface is a great one, in the case of *Mapping
Marronage* (*MM*), claims regarding multiple kinds of flight need more
elaboration, since the claims (as stated) by *MM* are not quite the same
as those made by *SB*. The *MM* site seems to offer layers of
experiences, propose engagement with evidential documentation of
movements, and call for attention to ephemera. To more fully actualize
these elements would make for a significant contribution.

It is always crucial to think about people’s movement as an index of
their lived experience. Much like *SB*, *MM* helps elicit a sense of
discovery in how rich a single life can be, especially when put in
relation to/network with the lives of others. But, again, there is great
potential here to complicate more dramatically the very idea of mapping
itself. What, for instance, might this project present for a person who
never leaves a very tight geographic radius but who fits one of this
site’s multiple definitions of *marronage*?

### Design

Is the site’s ultimate intent to map people’s movements, or to map the
life/transaction of things they produce? Is it to map individuals or
their traces, or to conceive of one as the index of the other? These
queries, engendered by *MM*, have so much potential, but the intent
needs to be more consistently framed across the site—on the level of the
sentence and, at the same time, in design terms. The site’s creator
(rightfully) wants *marronage* to encompass phenomena on multiple
registers. But because this is a hands-on experience, more might be done
to align those various goals with visually differentiated design
cues—for instance, color or icon. As it stands, every kind of history
represented on the site looks and feels the same, which undermines the
central tenet that marronage encompasses multiple kinds of experiential
states (e.g., physical or psychological fleeing, ephemeral feeling),
traces (written correspondence versus other ephemeral knowings), and so
on.

One suggestion might be to articulate more fully what the site can
actually show and to offer examples of what a user should be able to
determine or intuit from that data, thus demonstrating the stakes of the
data presented in the map interface, for instance. Also, more explicit
language might be included so as to add nuance to the specific uses of
*marronage* throughout the site.

An additional design suggestion would be to consider opening links in
pop-up windows, with a frame that includes the full citation for the
given resource. Though not always the prettiest solution, an i-frame
would help produce a more seamless user experience, while maintaining
the integrity of the site. Lastly, the maps need a zoom function for
political map capacity. One wonders, further, whether other kinds of
data visualization might better represent some of networks involved.
There are ways the idea of the world map risks discursively limiting the
kinds of connection and overlap the site means to illustrate.

### Credit

It remains unclear—unstated in any explicit way—how to understand the
roles of contributors to the project or the labor conditions under which
the project was produced, though one can glean that this is a
single-authored project developed by a professional design firm. A bit
more information concerning conceptual provenance and funding would be
welcome on the "About" page, for example. Although all documents in the
projects are at external links, these hyperlinks should not replace
citations for those sources. A "Works Cited" page, organized by who is
featured on the site, with all sources for each person listed beneath
her or his name, might be an elegant solution. Finally, the site author
might consider including more information on the main page about each
linked document; it is currently rather difficult to use because
everything looks the same (multiple items are named "correspondence,"
for example).

### Preservation

Currently, no information is provided regarding the life cycle and or
preservation of the project.


### Conclusion

On the whole, *Mapping Marronage* is an exciting project that has the
potential to offer both substantive and methodological innovations to
the study of the colonial black Atlantic. A valuable resource for both
research and pedagogy, the site’s curated content approaches the lives
of enslaved peoples in the eighteenth and nineteenth centuries from the
perspective of movement, network, and exchange. In so doing, it usefully
refigures the intersecting landscapes of the colonial Americas.

*Mapping Marronage*: Response
-----------------------------

Annette Joseph-Gabriel

Given the debates of our present moment about the exclusionary and often
revisionist stories that statues tell about the past, the irony is not
lost on me that *Mapping Marronage* began at the base of a monument. The
imposing equestrian statue of Henry Christophe in Port-au-Prince
memorializes Christophe as he was in his later years: a revolutionary
leader in the Haitian fight for liberty. But the narrative told by tour
guides at the site begins with his early life in slavery in Grenada.
Standing beneath the monument to Christophe on a hot afternoon in June
2016, reminded of his Grenadian origins and of the enslavement of
Boukman Dutty (another early leader of the Haitian Revolution) in
Jamaica, I was struck by the geography of remembrance. The monument to
Christophe in Haiti serves as a reminder that the fixed location of
seemingly immovable statues of marble or granite or bronze belies the
fluid, mobile, entangled stories of personhood and self-determination in
the Atlantic world.

*Mapping Marronage* is neither monument nor commemoration, though it
does seek to retrace and remember the movement of enslaved people within
and beyond the Atlantic world. The primary goal of the digital map is to
visualize enslaved people’s flights from captivity as processes, as
lived realities, and as relationships to space and power in slaveholding
societies. Because this vision of mobility is so expansive, it requires
different kinds of maps. The site therefore offers two kinds of
visualizations—flights and networks. The
"[Flight](http://mapping-marronage.rll.lsa.umich.edu/flight)" section is
a visual rendering of movement through space, movement that was
deliberate and haphazard, that doubled back on itself and created
networks and communities that were defined by enslavement but also
imagined life otherwise. A focus on travel, however, precludes the
experiences of those who lived and died on a single plantation but whose
influences, stories, ideas, and myths extended beyond the tightly
circumscribed sphere of their captivity. Indeed, as the project’s
reviewer asks, "What, for instance, might this project present for a
person who never leaves a very tight geographic radius but who fits one
of this site’s multiple definitions of *marronage*?"
"[Networks](http://mapping-marronage.rll.lsa.umich.edu/networks)"
attempts to account for these varied forms of mobility. Pierre
Toussaint, for example, moved only once, from Haiti to New York. Yet his
philanthropic works, economic transactions, correspondence, and family
networks extended far beyond New York City. His story, like that of
Charles Pierre Lambert, whose network shows what my students have termed
"intergenerational mobility," is a story about Atlantic bonds that often
included fraught intimacies between enslaved people and their enslavers.

The *Mapping Marronage* digital map was built by the Agile Humanities
Agency, whose members have been wonderfully thoughtful and communicative
collaborators. Much of the data on the map was generated by
undergraduate research assistants and students in my course Mapping the
French Atlantic. I am still working through best practices for
attribution that is attentive to questions of student data privacy and
that takes into account the ephemeral nature of undergraduate
researchers’ involvement with the project. The Colored Conventions
Project offers a useful model for crediting collaborators that I intend
to adapt for this purpose. Because *Mapping Marronage* tries to account
for varied forms of enslaved people’s mobility whose meanings are not
always readily decipherable, the data points on the map are accompanied
by text that briefly summarizes the nature and circumstances of
movement. In my mapping course, I encouraged my students to incorporate
direct quotes from the narratives they were working with, as one way to
think about which voices could be amplified or become more audible
through this map. Each point on the map also opens out further onto a
digitized version of the relevant archival source. As the reviewer aptly
points out, it is perhaps best to think about *Mapping Marronage* as
layers: layered accounts of layered lives. The project’s envisioned
users are students, teachers, and researchers who want to work with
visual and spatial renderings of enslaved people’s narratives. The
site’s future iterations have these audiences in mind, and the
reviewer’s helpful and generative suggestions provide clarity on the way
forward. I particularly appreciate the nudge to consider more robust
citation, and so the updated site will include a list of works cited,
with hyperlinks to the archival sources.

The reviewer also notes, more broadly, that the site does not yet show
all that it promises to show. The user interface currently does not show
differences in the kinds of movement that are encompassed in the
project’s expansive understanding of *marronage*. To rectify this, the
reviewer suggests reworking the framing text on the site to be more
transparent about its limits, to state what the site can actually show
*for now*. I am struck by this deceptively simple but really profound
remedy, because I have always approached digital work from the opposite
direction, by laying out my aspirations, the hopes and dreams that
underlie the project, as it were, and then allowing those goals to
unfold over time as I add to the project. But there is something to be
said, here, for the stakes of this particular work and for the need to
more accurately align the framing narrative of *Mapping Marronage* with
its functionality as part of a practice of being accountable to the
story the site seeks to tell. For this reason, I am deeply grateful to
the reviewer for this opportunity to think otherwise, to begin not from
the end of the project and feeling my way toward a goal but from the
beginning. To implement this suggestion, I plan to rewrite the site’s
framing narrative and to divide the
"[About](http://mapping-marronage.rll.lsa.umich.edu/about)" section into
two parts. The first part will give an overview of the project’s
overarching aims. The second will walk the user through which of these
aims are attainable in the moment, therefore functioning as part
tutorial, part framing essay. It is my hope that providing users with a
clearer vision of what is possible and what is not (yet) will open up
avenues for user feedback on ways the project might evolve to live up to
its promise of a multilayered visualization of marronage.

I hope that as users navigate the map, it becomes clear that this
project does not see the lives of enslaved people as mere data points.
However, spatial renderings, as the reviewer rightly notes, can flatten
complexity. The material conditions of doing digital work largely
account for this: more complex sites are more expensive to build. In an
ideal world where funds are plentiful and equitably distributed, the
trajectories on *Mapping Marronage* would be color coded by category,
allowing users to easily distinguish between travel, correspondence, and
legal testimony. In my ongoing conversations with Agile Humanities, we
also envision adding texture, as the reviewer recommends, particularly
to show archival uncertainty—solid lines will show movement whose
details, such as start and end dates, are fairly certain; dashes will
represent the archival breaks, the silences and ruptures in narratives
that tell of movement that was concealed and subversive.

While the expense associated with building a more complex site explains
some of the map’s flattening, it does not account for all of it. Telling
stories about slavery requires us to grapple with the ethics of speaking
the unspeakable and of recounting often unimaginable horrors. How do we
visualize the journeys of those African captives on slave ships who were
jettisoned overboard during the Middle Passage? Would a dot on the map
in the middle of the Atlantic Ocean mark loss, or would it replicate
violence? *Mapping Marronage* began at a site of commemoration, Henry
Christophe’s statue in Port-au-Prince, and the ethics of commemoration
continue to haunt this project as it evolves. I extend my sincerest
gratitude to the reviewer for these productive new directions.

---

[^1]: See *Mapping Marronage*,
    <http://mapping-marronage.rll.lsa.umich.edu/>.

[^2]: See *In the Same Boats*, <http://sameboats.org/>.
