---
layout: page
section: introduction
issue: 5
order: 0
date: December 2020
title: "Onward"
doi: "https://doi.org/10.7916/archipelagos-39cd-mn05"
author: 
- name: Kaiama L. Glover
  shortname: Glover
  bio: >
    [Kaiama L. Glover](https://barnard.edu/profiles/kaiama-l-glover) is Associate Professor of French and Africana Studies at Barnard College, Columbia University. She is the author of [Haiti Unbound: A Spiralist Challenge to the Postcolonial Canon](http://liverpooluniversitypress.co.uk/products/61903) (Liverpool UP 2010), first editor of [Marie Vieux Chauvet: Paradoxes of the Postcolonial Feminine](http://yalebooks.com/book/9780300214192/yale-french-studies-number-128) (Yale French Studies 2016), and translator of Frankétienne's Ready to Burst (Archipelago Books 2014). She has received awards and fellowships from the National Endowment for the Humanities, the Mellon Foundation, and the Fulbright Foundation. Current projects include forthcoming translations of Marie Vieux Chauvet's *Dance on the Volcano* (Archipelago Books) and René Depestre's *Hadriana in All My Dreams* (Akashic Books), and the multimedia platform *In the Same Boats: Toward an Afro-Atlantic Visual Cartography*.
- name: Alex Gil
  shortname: Gil
  bio: >
    [Alex Gil](http://www.elotroalex.com/) is the Digital Scholarship Librarian at Columbia University Libraries. His research and practice focuses on digital humanities, epistemic design, minimal computing, and Caribbean literature. He is co-founder and moderator of [Columbia's Group for Experimental Methods in Humanistic Research](http://xpmethod.plaintext.in/), and coordinator of the Butler Studio at Columbia University Libraries.
language: en
---

We have had a hard time settling on the "right" moment to launch this
fifth issue of *archipelagos* *journal*. This is very likely because so
much about This Long Year 2020 just hasn’t felt, well, right. With
dangerous shenanigans ever-emanating from the executive branch, fires
burning relentlessly on the West Coast, and state violence being
perpetrated against black women and men across the United States and
beyond, who were we to interrupt the global doom-scroll with missives
from our digital Caribbean? How silly, though, to wait. The tides of
history churn and we bob along, roiled certainly but neither silenced
nor undone. We very much have things to say that amount, yes, to
interventions in these times.

It is around the concept—the necessity—of intervention that the
contributions to *archipelagos*(5) coalesce. Each essay and platform
presented here considers the ways Caribbean subjects in the digital
realm have refashioned the terms, the tools, and the terrain of
representation of the self in the world. Engaging explicitly popular and
accessible forms, from memes to music to blogs to maps, of common
concern is the matter of crafting alternative authority within the
structures of domination that condition our contemporary online and
offline experiences.

Tzarina Prater and Jonathan J. Felix, respectively, direct our attention to
the literal and metaphorical comments section with their powerful
reminders of the critical pathways that emerge when we attend to the
possibilities of online call-and-response. Both contributors explore the
oft ignored digital paratext that writes back to and within the more
sedimented textual offerings of corporate platforms such as Facebook and
YouTube. Kelly Baker Josephs also considers informal spaces of online
network- and community-building by Caribbean subjects. Her essay
examines how self-identified queer Jamaican writers Staceyann Chin
and Marlon James have made use of the blogosphere to cultivate an
autobiographical presence outside and independent of traditional
publishing venues.

This issue also takes seriously the classroom as a space of real
intervention. Both Jacob Edmond and Tao Leigh Goffe lay out ways that
seemingly neutral practices like seeing and mapping bear deconstructing
when it comes to the matter of representational authority in the
Caribbean. Edmond makes the case for privileging the audio over the
visual in pedagogical engagements with Kamau Brathwaite’s poetry. In his
sound-rich essay Edmond argues that digital audio archives provide
platforms through which to experience Brathwaite’s work in ways that
disorder our conventional reading and teaching practices. Goffe
similarly proposes shifting our intellectual investments from the visual
to the sonic in a determined praxis of what she calls "unmapping."
Placing black and indigenous Caribbean bodies in contestatory relation
to the signposts of imperial modernity—to maps in particular—allows
Goffe to bring students into Maroon spaces of both collaboration and,
where necessary, refusal.

This issue’s second valence also takes up and takes on cartographies of
empire and modes of pedagogical refusal. Stephanie Curci and Christopher
Jones’s visualization, an interactive map and timeline of the Haitian
Revolution, is a rich resource for secondary school teachers and
students seeking to robustly situate Haiti in the American age of
independence. A deliberate pushback to the silences that surround the
Haitian past, Curci and Jones’s project makes a crucial scholarly
intervention into the world beyond the academy—a world that ultimately
nourishes the academy in a very real way. Annette Joseph-Gabriel’s
visualization of *marronage* as literal and metaphorical black Atlantic
practice of refusal also proposes a radical intervention, pedagogical in
both its construction and its intention. The map not only contributes to
a burgeoning practice of counter-mapping in our Caribbean digital
scholarly communities, it does so in conscious intertextual relationship
with that growing corpus. This kind of work perfectly embodies the
connective aspirations and trajectory of our journal in this time---at
this moment---of foreboding discontinuities.

Read. Explore. Enjoy. We hope *archipelagos*(5) will have been worth the
wait.

Onward,<br>
Kaiama and Alex
