---
layout: article
section: articles
title: 
  "long": "Teaching without a Text: Close Listening to Kamau Brathwaite's Digital Audio Archive"
  "short": "Teaching without a Text"
doi: "https://doi.org/10.7916/archipelagos-neey-zd31"
author: 
- name: Jacob Edmond
  shortname: Edmond
  bio: >
    Jacob Edmond is a professor in English at the University of Otago, New Zealand. He is the author of *Make It the Same: Poetry in the Age of Global Media* (Columbia University Press, 2019) and *A Common Strangeness: Contemporary Poetry, Cross-Cultural Encounter, Comparative Literature* (Fordham University Press, 2012). His essays have appeared in *Comparative Literature*, *Contemporary Literature*, *Poetics Today*, *Slavic Review*, and *The China Quarterly*.
date: December 2020
issue: 5
order: 4
abstract: >
  New media technologies—from the tape recorder to the computer—enabled Kamau Brathwaite's revolutionary poetic approach; digital technologies likewise enable us to study and teach his groundbreaking work in new ways. This essay argues that teaching and studying Brathwaite should begin with the audible word not the written text and that digital audio archives and platforms can play a key role in enabling this approach. Digital audio archives such as PennSound and the Poetry Archive allow students and scholars to approach Brathwaite's work by listening closely to a wide range of sound recordings. This essay demonstrates the utility of this close listening approach by taking advantage of the digital platform of *archipelagos journal* to interweave its text with Brathwaite's recorded voice. It not only demonstrates the value of approaching Brathwaite's work through digital sound recordings but also argues for a larger overturning of critical, pedagogical, and essayistic conventions in literary studies through a methodological turn away from the page.
abstract_fr: >
  New media technologies—from the tape recorder to the computer—enabled Kamau Brathwaite's revolutionary poetic approach; digital technologies likewise enable us to study and teach his groundbreaking work in new ways. This essay argues that teaching and studying Brathwaite should begin with the audible word not the written text and that digital audio archives and platforms can play a key role in enabling this approach. Digital audio archives such as PennSound and the Poetry Archive allow students and scholars to approach Brathwaite's work by listening closely to a wide range of sound recordings. This essay demonstrates the utility of this close listening approach by taking advantage of the digital platform of *archipelagos journal* to interweave its text with Brathwaite's recorded voice. It not only demonstrates the value of approaching Brathwaite's work through digital sound recordings but also argues for a larger overturning of critical, pedagogical, and essayistic conventions in literary studies through a methodological turn away from the page.  
abstract_es: >
  New media technologies—from the tape recorder to the computer—enabled Kamau Brathwaite's revolutionary poetic approach; digital technologies likewise enable us to study and teach his groundbreaking work in new ways. This essay argues that teaching and studying Brathwaite should begin with the audible word not the written text and that digital audio archives and platforms can play a key role in enabling this approach. Digital audio archives such as PennSound and the Poetry Archive allow students and scholars to approach Brathwaite's work by listening closely to a wide range of sound recordings. This essay demonstrates the utility of this close listening approach by taking advantage of the digital platform of *archipelagos journal* to interweave its text with Brathwaite's recorded voice. It not only demonstrates the value of approaching Brathwaite's work through digital sound recordings but also argues for a larger overturning of critical, pedagogical, and essayistic conventions in literary studies through a methodological turn away from the page.
language: en
pdf: false
---


*Dedicated to the memory of Kamau Brathwaite, 1930–2020*

---

{% include epigraph.html
    quote = "All that I have of her is voices."
    citation = "Kamau Brathwaite, \"Ancestors\""
%}


New media technologies enabled Kamau Brathwaite's revolutionary
poetic approach; digital technologies likewise enable us to study and
teach his groundbreaking work in new ways. I teach Brathwaite's work at
both undergraduate and graduate levels in a state research university in
New Zealand that attracts students from a diverse demographic and with a
wide range of abilities. I most often introduce Brathwaite's work in a
second-year course on poetry and music, in which I seek to challenge the
primacy of the written text and the clear-cut distinction between poetry
and music. I find that approaching poetry in this way requires my
students and me to unlearn the traditional focus on the written text in
literary studies, but that the pedagogical rewards more than compensate
for this challenge. Students begin my courses with no particular
background in orature. Yet once these digital natives have overcome
their initial prejudices favoring written text, they find that a close
listening approach empowers them to be not just better listeners but
better readers. Such an approach draws on students' everyday experiences
of orality and recording technologies through downloaded and streamed
popular music. By using these same digital media to listen to
Brathwaite, the students heighten their consciousness of critical facets
of his poetry that are difficult to teach from the page alone. Based on
this experience, I argue here that teaching and studying Brathwaite
should begin with the audible word, not the written text, and that
digital audio archives and platforms can play a key role in enabling
this approach. Digital audio archives allow students and teachers to
approach Brathwaite's work by listening closely to a wide range of sound
recordings. The digital platform of *archipelagos* in turn enables me to
demonstrate this close listening approach by allowing me to interweave
my words with Brathwaite's recorded voice.

A close listening approach to teaching literature challenges critical as
well as pedagogical conventions through a methodological turn away from
the page. The lack of and need for close listening to modern and
contemporary poetry has been recognized in a wide range of work from the
1990s onward.[^1] The past decade or so has seen a particularly marked
upsurge in new scholarship on poetry performance and recording.[^2] The
increasing emphasis on the spoken word in the study of poetry is
reflected in and enabled by online platforms such as YouTube, Facebook,
and Twitter, through which many poets in and beyond the Caribbean now
distribute their work. The turn to the recorded word is also marked by
audio-archive projects such as the Poetry Archive and
PennSound.[^3] Yet despite this increasing attention to and availability
of recordings via the internet, close listening remains a largely
unexplored field and one that is particularly important and valuable in
the classroom context.

Nowhere is close listening more necessary and fruitful than in the case
of Brathwaite. Many have noted the importance of performance to
Brathwaite's poetics. His celebrated performance of *Rights of Passage*
at the Jeanetta Cochrane Theatre in London in 1967 was the first public
event of the Caribbean Artists Movement. The performance itself was
proposed by Caribbean Artists Movement cofounder John La Rose after
listening to a tape-recording of Brathwaite reading the work.[^4]
Brathwaite himself recalls how his Oxford University Press editor agreed
to the inclusion of the allegedly incomprehensible "Rites" in his 1969
*Islands* only after he heard the text performed.[^5] Gordon Rohlehr and
Elaine Savory similarly note the impact of Brathwaite's performances on
listeners.[^6] There are thus good reasons to believe Brathwaite when he
claims that "if you ignore the noise . . . then you lose part of the
meaning" and advocates "a music literature."[^7] Yet approaches to his
work, with the notable exception of brief discussions by Loretta Collins
and Kenneth Sherwood, tend to place the audio text in a subordinate
position to the written.[^8] And among all these examples of
scholarship, it is only Sherwood who includes recordings as
accompaniment to the essay; even then, the recordings and essay sit side
by side.[^9] In contrast, this essay seeks to use the digital medium to
integrate audio clips and analysis and so model the kind of close
listening approach required for both studying and teaching Brathwaite.

A close listening approach enables students to explore Brathwaite's
intertwining of performance, versioning, sound, music, and vernacular
with his political, historical, and social concerns. First, it upsets
students' assumptions about the primacy of the written text and
encourages them to treat each recording, live rendition, and equally
variable written text as a performative instantiation of a poetic text
that exists only in and through its multiple performed, recorded, and
written versions. Second, it highlights how this versioning is the
product of Brathwaite's use of oral and musical forms, from vernacular
language to jazz and calypso, as well as of changes in twentieth- and
twenty-first-century sound recording and of the turn to vernacular and
dialect in modernist poetry. Third, teaching Brathwaite through audio
rather than written text allows students to grasp in a concrete way
Brathwaite's emphasis on sound and voice as an embodiment of the history
and politics of the Caribbean. It thus also draws attention to the politics of the classroom
situation, which, like Brathwaite's poetry, requires listening and
response through aural and oral acts of communication.

Audio Texts and Versioning 
---------------------------

Close listening challenges the primacy of the written text and thereby
allows students to grasp the significance of Brathwaite's poetics of
versioning: his continuous rearrangement and re-presentation of existing
poems in new forms. The term *versioning* as I use it here is itself
intimately connected to the history of sound recording in the Caribbean.
In the early 1960s, Jamaican producers began to use dub plates
(impermanent acetate discs) in the "process of 'versioning,' a method of
serially recycling recorded material developed by producers desiring to
ensure the longest commercial life for a given piece of recorded music
despite economic constraints and a limited pool of musicians."[^10] By
the mid-1960s the DJs who operated the sound systems in Jamaica had
begun to rap, or "toast," over the music—hence their increasing need for
remixed instrumental, or "dub," tracks. Emerging from this recording and
performance culture, *version* became "one of the most important words
in reggae," in which there are sometimes "literally hundreds of
different versions of the same rhythm or melody." More broadly
understood, the continuous remixing of existing material in new versions
is arguably "at the heart . . . of *all* Afro-American and Caribbean
musics."[^11]

Scholars have drawn analogies between Caribbean literature and musical
versioning practices. Evelyn O'Callaghan, for instance, reads Caribbean
women's fiction by analogy with the versioning practice of dub.[^12]
However, the connection between Brathwaite's work and dub versioning is
arguably more direct and even literal. Brathwaite first developed his
versioning practice through sound recordings at the same time—and partly
in the same place—that dub versioning emerged.

Brathwaite first acquired a tape recorder in 1960 while on leave from a
position in Ghana, and he immediately began using it to record a series
of "8 or 9 jazz poems": "I wrote them . . . a few days after my first
return to Barbados in 1960, returning them into my new reel-to-reel
Philips tape recorder, accompanied on my record player . . . by the
pieces that had inspired the poems."[^13] In these "jazz poems," six of
which were published in *Kyk-Over-Al*, Brathwaite combined two audio
reproduction machines—the record player and the tape recorder—to produce
a multitrack version.[^14] His tape-based versioning practice
anticipated the dub versioning that was at the time developing in
Jamaica, to where he would relocate in mid-1963, a year after returning
permanently from Ghana to the Caribbean. If "from the global perspective
. . . Jamaica's emphasis on versioning facilitated the transformation of
formerly fixed pop songs into the more fluid, remix-based conceptions of
composing typified by today's digital technology," Brathwaite's
tape-based versioning practices made a similar contribution to poetry.
Brathwaite used tape to develop a versioning practice that is, like dub
music, "mutable and modular," in which each poem or series of poems can
be reworked in multiple audio versions.[^15]

Though not widely recognized, Brathwaite's use of audio versioning
played a critical role in the composition of his *Arrivants* trilogy:
*Rights of Passage*, *Islands*, and *Masks*. "I knew right away . . .
that it called for ORAL RESONANCE," Brathwaite recalls of *Rights of
Passage*. "I mean I just had to read it out onto tape almost at once and
all the drafts after the first one were influenced by the sound on the
tape." Tape was, in fact, the poem's first medium of "publication."
According to the liner note to a CD version of the *The Arrivants*, the
first publicly aired recording was made in Jamaica in 1965 "on his reel
to reel 'with all the natural sounds inside it'—wind, waves, cocks
crowing, dogs barking, cars passing, people walking, talking."[^16]
Brathwaite's account reveals the value he places on each recording—be it
mixed with music or ambient noise—as a unique version of his poetic
work.

Listening to recordings of Brathwaite not only reveals the importance of
audio recording to his versioning practice but also highlights the
importance of the various audio media through which his work has been
recorded and the possibilities and challenges of approaching such audio
work through the digital archive. Between the 1950s and his death in
early 2020, Brathwaite produced audio versions across a variety of media
and formats. These versions include his recorded broadcasts for the BBC
program *Caribbean Voices* in the 1950s; the recordings made on a
portable transistor reel-to-reel tape recorder in the early to
mid-1960s; the recordings made on a large Akai reel-to-reel machine for
the Caribbean Artists Movement in London in the late 1960s; the LP
versions of his *Arrivants* trilogy released in the late 1960s and early
1970s; the cassette tape recordings of his readings and lectures from
the 1970s to the 1990s; and the digital recordings across various
formats made over the last two to three decades.

Today it is much easier to teach Brathwaite through close listening
thanks to the distribution of multiple recordings of his work online
through sites such as PennSound. Digital archives enhance the ability of
teachers to present Brathwaite's recordings in class and of students to
access those files outside class. At the same time, these digital audio
files threaten to diminish our attention to the different media used to record these performances. It matters, for instance, that
Brathwaite first made extensive use of homemade audio recordings through
the medium of reel-to-reel tape. It also matters that listeners
approaching the LP versions of *The Arrivants* would encounter the
albums framed by a series of liner notes and artwork. And for *The
Arrivants* in particular, the tape-recorded and LP versions also shaped
the structure of the texts, which were, for instance, punctuated in the
LP versions by the division into A and B sides. In contrast, the 2004
New York City Segue reading sampled in this essay is born digital. Such
differences tend to be obscured when students encounter a series of
downloadable MP3 files. However, it is precisely for this reason that
teaching Brathwaite through close listening is also an opportunity to
have students reflect on the specificity of these media and how we
encounter them differently when we approach them through online digital
archives or through this online multimedia essay. 

Close listening to
Brathwaite should also prompt us to consider the incompleteness and
contingencies of the archival record of sound recording. What is
currently available online, for instance, is only a fraction of the
extant audio record associated with Brathwaite. Moreover, many
predigital recordings, such as the 1965 tape-recording of *Rights of
Passage* that Brathwaite's cites as the poem's first form of
publication, have likely been lost forever.[^17] Brathwaite's archive in
Jamaica, destroyed by Hurricane Gilbert in 1988, reportedly contained many
unique audio recordings. Close listening to Brathwaite enables a larger
reflection on the nature of digital audio archives: what they can tell
us and what they leave unsaid.

Grasping versioning through close listening also provides a way into
Brathwaite's use of oral and musical traditions. Brathwaite's use of
music has been extensively documented and analyzed by Rohlehr,
Collins, Lilieth Nelson, Donette Francis, and others. One way to
develop a sense of close listening attuned to musicality is for students
to listen to the sources Rohlehr identifies alongside the poems.[^18]
The effectiveness of this approach is, however, greatly enhanced by
listening to Brathwaite's texts in recorded performances. These
performances often verge on song, underscoring the connections Rohlehr
identifies and adding a layer that is not present in the written text.
Examples of the shift to song are plentiful in Brathwaite performance
and include:[^19a] 

{% include audio.html 
  url = "https://media.sas.upenn.edu/pennsound/authors/Brathwaite/Edmond-clips/1%20Negus%20Segue%202004%20conclusion%20sung.mp3"
  title = "\"Negus\" (extract)"
%}

{% include audio.html 
  url = "https://media.sas.upenn.edu/pennsound/authors/Brathwaite/Edmond-clips/2%20The%20Twist%20Segue%202004.mp3"
  title = "\"The Twist\""
%}

{% include audio.html 
  url = "https://media.sas.upenn.edu/pennsound/authors/Brathwaite/Edmond-clips/3%20Atumpan.mp3"
  title = "\"Atumpan\""
%}

{% include audio.html 
  url = "https://media.sas.upenn.edu/pennsound/authors/Brathwaite/Edmond-clips/4%20Caliban%20Segue%202004%20limbo%20sung%20clip.mp3"
  title = "\"Caliban\" (extract)"
%}

{% include audio.html 
  url = "https://media.sas.upenn.edu/pennsound/authors/Brathwaite/Edmond-clips/5%20from%20Soweto.mp3"
  title = "\"Soweto\" (extract)"
%}

Also present are instances of drum-like repetition,
as in:[^19b]

{% include audio.html 
  url = "https://media.sas.upenn.edu/pennsound/authors/Brathwaite/Edmond-clips/5b%20KB%20Nights%20from%20cross%20cult%20poetics%20Namsetoura.mp3"
  title = "\"Nights\" (extract)"
%}

{% include audio.html 
  url = "https://media.sas.upenn.edu/pennsound/authors/Brathwaite/Edmond-clips/6%20shepherd%20extract.mp3"
  title = "\"Shepherd\" (extract)"
%}

{% include audio.html 
  url = "https://media.sas.upenn.edu/pennsound/authors/Brathwaite/Edmond-clips/7%20Wings%20of%20a%20Dove%20down%20down%20extract.mp3"
  title = "\"Wings of a Dove\" (extract)"
%}

{% include audio.html 
  url = "https://media.sas.upenn.edu/pennsound/authors/Brathwaite/Edmond-clips/8%20angel%20engine%20extract.mp3"
  title = "\"Angel/Engine\" (extract)"
%}

Through close listening to such recordings, students
interrogate the intertwining of Brathwaite's work with oral and musical
traditions that themselves produce many versions, as in multiple
performances or recordings of the same song.

A close listening approach does not imply that the written text is
unimportant but allows students to recognize that each audio text
constitutes a version as significant as any written version. The notion
of versioning in Brathwaite's work (related to the broader notion of
"othering" that Nathaniel Mackey applies to Brathwaite's poetry) is
often addressed in criticism and teaching through Brathwaite's reworking
of earlier poems and cycles in books such as his 1992 *Middle Passages*
and 2001 *Ancestors* and through his Sycorax video-style: the graphic
textual versioning practice that he developed on his Apple Mac computer
in the 1980s.[^20] Yet many of Brathwaite's versions, such as, for
example, the 1994 *Barabajan Poems: 1492–1992*, started life in a
recorded oral performance, and, consequently, his poetics of versioning
is equally approachable through close listening to recorded audio
texts.[^21]

Through close listening, students encounter rich examples of
Brathwaite's versioning and rearrangement of poems. "The Rwanda Poems,"
for instance, exists, in a published version under that name, only as an
audio recording of a 1994 performance, although the closely related
cycle "Rwanda" appears in print as part 3 of "New Gods of the Middle
Passages" in Brathwaite's 2001 *Kamau Monograph*.[^22] In the "New Gods"
version, however, not all of "The Rwanda Poems" falls into the "Rwanda"
section, and the poems are reordered and arranged alongside additional
poems and other print material. The performed cycle "The Rwanda Poems"
is itself an amalgam of poems from *The Arrivants*, including "Negus"
and part of "Caliban," and newer work, again reflecting Brathwaite's
practice of refashioning his existing material. In the recording of
"The Rwanda Poems," Brathwaite explains how his versioning practice includes
both his Sycorax video-style and his performances. He describes how the
poems "are layered or interfaced with some earlier material . . . to
create another effect from that earlier material."[^23]

{% include audio.html 
  url = "https://media.sas.upenn.edu/pennsound/authors/Brathwaite/Edmond-clips/9%20KB%20Rwanda%20Poems%20intro.mp3"
  title = "Extract from the introduction to \"The Rwanda Poems\""
%}


Similarly, in many other readings, Brathwaite presents
newer material alongside poems from *The Arrivants*, structuring this
combination into a narrative of personal biography or a framework for
thinking about Caribbean history in the present.[^24] Likewise, in his
2004 Segue performance at the Bowery Poetry Club in New York City,
Brathwaite creates an alternative and integrated cycle deriving mainly
from *The Arrivants*. He follows the final line of "Atumpan," "may we
succeed," with the opening lines of "Naming," "How then shall we /
succeed?"[^25]

{% include audio.html 
  url = "https://media.sas.upenn.edu/pennsound/authors/Brathwaite/Edmond-clips/10%20KB%20Atumpan%20to%20Naming%20segue%20in%20Segue%20reading.mp3"
  title = "Transition from \"Atumpan\" to \"Naming\""
%}


He thus seamlessly links two poems separated by more than one hundred pages in the print version of his trilogy.

Close listening overcomes the bewilderment that some students––and
likewise scribal poets and critics—experience at Brathwaite's recycling
of poetic material. As Savory points out, Brathwaite's versioning
practice contradicts "Western traditions of creativity since the
Renaissance" that "have elevated originality." At stake here is an idea
of creativity as "process, and performance, and revisioning," arguably
more akin to "many African, oral cultures."[^26] Close listening conveys
such a conception of creativity to students by placing each printed and
written poetic version in the familiar context of repeated concert
performances, recordings, or remixes of a single song or piece of music.

I encourage students to think about Brathwaite's versioning techniques
by asking them to listen closely to his performances and then to compare
them to the written text. Encouraging students to listen for differences
heightens their attention to the text (audio and written), to word
changes, and to the relationship between page and stage. Students hear
how Brathwaite frequently extends or modifies repetitions and introduces
new sung or nonverbal elements, especially drumming. For example,
students can hear poems such as "The Twist" in quite different versions
in his 2004 Segue and 1988 Pittsburgh International Poetry Forum
performances. In each case, it is not only that the words are different
and the drumming accompaniment varies but that each version places the
poem in a radically different context. Equally, they find that
Brathwaite sometimes cuts sections from poems in performance, as in his
Griffin Poetry Prize performance of "Kumina."[^27] At other times he
runs one poem into another, as in the combining of "Xângo at the Summer
Solstice" and "The Twist" in his Segue reading.[^28]

{% include audio.html 
  url = "https://media.sas.upenn.edu/pennsound/authors/Brathwaite/Edmond-clips/11%20KB%20Xango%20to%20the%20Twist%20Segue%20reading.mp3"
  title = "Transition from \"Xângo at the Summer Solstice\" to \"The Twist\" "
%}


They also note that Brathwaite frequently
interrupts his poems to comment on them.[^29] Close listening to all
these variations provides the basis for a discussion of the text
informed by an awareness of its constitutive multiplicity.

Brathwaite's poetics of versioning can be related to what he calls "montage" and "calibanisms," *the name he gives to his punning word combinations and new coinages*.[^30a] To illustrate the role of montage, I have students listen to Brathwaite performing "The Emigrants"[^30b] in his 1987 International Poetry Forum performance.

{% include audio.html 
  url = "https://media.sas.upenn.edu/pennsound/authors/Brathwaite/Edmond-clips/12%20KB%20Emigrants%20montage%20IPF%201987.mp3"
  title = "\"The Emigrants\" (extract) and discussion of montage"
%}


In this performance, Brathwaite interrupts the poem to
say that this is the first time he used the technique of montage in his
poetry, referring to how the poem superimposes the experience of
Caribbean migrants traveling to Britain after the Second World War on
Christopher Columbus's voyage to the Americas. I point out to my
students that Brathwaite's own interjection about montage itself
constitutes another layer in the montage and that more generally the
interplay between the many versions of his poems in his books and in his
recordings functions in this montage-like, juxtaposing, multilayered
way.

In addition to drawing a parallel between Brathwaite's montage techniques and his versioning of his poems, I also note how these versions are larger-scale instances of his reiterations and rearrangements of words. These word repetitions—or "insistences," in Gertrude Stein's sense—appear frequently in Brathwaite's punning, paronomastic poetry.[^31] For example, Brathwaite links "semicolons" and "semicolonies" in "Negus," and "canon" and "cannon" in speaking about the difficulties of escaping the tyranny of English literature in his 1987 International Poetry Forum talk and poetry reading.[^32]

{% include audio.html 
  url = "https://media.sas.upenn.edu/pennsound/authors/Brathwaite/Edmond-clips/13%20KB%20canon%20as%20cannon%20IPF%201987.mp3"
  title = "On canon as cannon"
%}


Close listening to "Negus" demonstrates
the relationship between word repetition and the repetition of entire
poems in Brathwaite's performance poetics. In the style of a preacher,
Brathwaite builds "Negus" around the repeated word "it" and the phrases
"it is not" and "it is not enough."[^33]

{% include audio.html 
  url = "https://media.sas.upenn.edu/pennsound/authors/Brathwaite/Edmond-clips/14%20KB%20it%20it%20from%20Negus%20Segue.mp3"
  title = "\"Negus\" (opening lines)"
%}


This word repetition parallels the repetition of the
poem itself in various performances, in which it is frequently used by
Brathwaite as an introductory piece.[^34] Just as the word "it" builds
up a mesmeric power as it is repeated haltingly in Brathwaite's
performance, each repetition of "Negus" allows the poem to accumulate
new resonances. By close listening to such variations in the selection,
ordering, and instantiation of his poems, students recognize how the
repetition and variation of set elements from the single word to the
poem become critical structural devices in Brathwaite's poetics.

Oral and Musical Forms
----------------------

When students recognize that Brathwaite's poetry exists in multiple
versions with no one definitive text, they apprehend a feature that ties
his work—and his audio texts in particular—to oral folk traditions and
popular music. A simple but critical example of the importance of
musicality and sound to Brathwaite's poetics comes from "Calypso" in
*The Arrivants*, which Brathwaite uses in *History of the Voice* to
exemplify the need to break out of the iambic pentameter and English
literary tradition.[^35] In reading the print version of Brathwaite's
*History of the Voice*, however, we encounter precisely the problem with
approaching his work through the written text. In the essay Brathwaite
explains how, when read aloud, the poem's calypso rhythm works "to break
down the pentameter."[^36] And yet without the benefit of hearing
Brathwaite perform these lines we have to take it on trust that the poem
overturns rather than evokes the pentameter beat.

Listening to Brathwaite discuss the poem "Calypso" in his 1987
International Poetry Forum performance, however, provides a vivid
illustration for students of how the poem resists conventional English
prosody, an illustration that directly challenges the primacy of the
written text and, simultaneously, underscores the importance of oral and
musical traditions. In his recorded discussion of "Calypso," Brathwaite performs the distinction between poetry on
the page and in performance as the difference between a conventional
English poetic reading and an almost sung version using the timed rhythm
of the calypso beat.[^37]

{% include audio.html 
  url = "https://media.sas.upenn.edu/pennsound/authors/Brathwaite/Edmond-clips/15%20KB%20IPF%201987%20Calypso.mp3"
  title = "Discussion and performance of the opening lines of \"Calypso\""
%}


Brathwaite reads the opening lines twice. His
first reading demonstrates how, "on the page," the poem has "almost the
hint of the dreaded pentameter." He goes on to explain, however, that
the poem should be read with attention to the *kaiso* rhythm signaled by
the title. In his second reading of the poem, Brathwaite demonstrates
his point by performing the opening lines accompanied by his own
drumming and in the musical or timed rhythm of a calypso.[^38] The
difference between spoken and musically timed speech evident in the
recording unsettles the stress patterns of standard English in a way
that recalls the distinctive stress given to the final syllables of some
words in some varieties of Caribbean English. I point out to students that the deviations
from expected stress patterns and traditional English meters parallel
the way Western music fails to "differentiate between the many patterns
of accent that are possible in a musical period," a failure that led
early European listeners to falsely conclude that there was no concept
of musical period in African music.[^39] Brathwaite's performance also
dramatizes a debate within anglophone Caribbean poetry about the
relationship between European prosody and Afro-Caribbean rhythm. His
recorded performance of "Calypso" implicitly opposes Derek Walcott's
assertion, made in a 1977 interview, that "Calypso is pentametric in
composition."[^40] The recording not only demonstrates to students the
limits of reading the text on the page but also highlights the capacity
of Brathwaite's use of voice and music to dramatize battles over
language and poetic and musical traditions.

Other performances in which Brathwaite moves into song also highlight his adaptation—or versioning—of musical forms. I have students listen to examples such as "Ancestors," which ends in the "blues" "Sookey dead-o," and the concluding "*bongo man a come* / **bruggadung**" of "Soweto."[^41]

{% include audio.html 
  url = "https://media.sas.upenn.edu/pennsound/authors/Brathwaite/Edmond-clips/16%20KB%20IPF%201987%20Ancestors%20extract.mp3"
  title = "\"Ancestors\" (extract)"
%}

{% include audio.html 
  url = "https://media.sas.upenn.edu/pennsound/authors/Brathwaite/Edmond-clips/17%20KB%20Bongo%20man%20song%20from%20Soweto%20reading.mp3"
  title = "\"Soweto\" (extract)"
%}
 
Such instances of song provide a context
too for the more clearly communal and spiritual music-making invoked and
performed in "Angel/Engine."[^42] These moments of song are also the
places where Brathwaite will most often deviate from his published
written versions, especially by varying the number of repetitions or
sometimes even skipping whole sections or adding new lines.[^43] These
variations highlight the context of live performance, Brathwaite's
consciousness of the need to entertain, and the powerful grip that these
musical moments have on his audience (they are the most likely to be
followed by applause in live performances).

Close listening also reveals how Brathwaite's use of dialect and music
appeals to and builds on a modernist legacy of vernacular speech,
popular music, and improvisation. The use of vernacular, or what
Brathwaite calls "nation language," can be heard and appreciated in
poems such as "The Dust" and "Rites," which students find much more
readily comprehensible in recorded performance than on the page.[^44]
For some scholars, Brathwaite's use of vernacular and popular music
echoes T. S. Eliot's "revolutionary voice of early modernism, a voice
that challenges Standard English poetry with new types of speech and
forms of popular culture."[^45] What most scholars miss, however, is the
literalness of Brathwaite's "listening to Eliot."[^46] I play recordings
of Eliot to my students, noting how Brathwaite cites hearing "Eliot's
actual voice––or rather his recorded voice . . . ––not the texts" as
being influential on his development.[^47]

Audio technologies play a key role in Brathwaite's poetics and in his
own formative listening to recordings of Eliot and others. I find
students become more conscious of the role of audio technologies when
they connect Brathwaite's recording and sampling poetics to their own
use of digital audio files. I ask students to compare Brathwaite's
practice to their own construction of a personal canon through audio
collections and playlists. Using Brathwaite's example, my students have
created their own playlists of poems and music in response to
Brathwaite's poetry.[^48]

Brathwaite has long used audio technologies, drawing on his personal
recordings and playlists of poetry and music in his own poetic
compositions and in his talks and writing about poetry. The latter is
exemplified by his essay *History of the Voice*, which includes an
extensive discography. Subtitled "An Electronic Lecture" when it first
appeared in print, the essay started life as a talk that involved the
interplay of Brathwaite's live voice and a variety of poetic and musical
recordings complied on a mixtape. Brathwaite emphasizes the importance
of the recorded word and what a reading of the published essay misses:
"I have to have a tape recorder for this presentation."[^49] Here
Brathwaite also highlights the fact that the published essay is itself
an edited transcription of a recording of a live performance of the
lecture.[^50]

Through a close listening approach, Brathwaite's turn to the technology
of the computer can be seen in the light of his earlier use of audio
technologies. Close listening to Brathwaite helps reveal the multiple
ways his use of oral, folk, and musical traditions engages twentieth- and twenty-first-century technologies,
from radio to the computer.[^51] Recognizing Brathwaite's indebtedness
to audio technologies unsettles the contention that his use of the new
technology of the computer contradicts his earlier emphasis on folk,
oral, and musical forms.[^52] A close listening approach to Brathwaite
underscores how his use of popular music and popular music itself arise
out of innovations in recording and transmission technologies—including
the World Wide Web through which his recordings are available for
teaching and study today.

Politics and Performance
------------------------

Through close listening, students also become attuned to the political
and social significance of Brathwaite's recorded performances, which
address an audience and demand a response. The pedagogical challenge
here is to assist students in relating their relatively straightforward
descriptive analysis of Brathwaite's performances to the complex
relationship between performed word, performer, and audience. These
issues are, of course, also at stake on the page, but the context of
performance, particularly recordings of live performance, prompts
students to question the nature and political significance of the
relationship between listener and speaker.

I illustrate to students the political significance of Brathwaite's
performances through close listening to his use of the limbo. In his
*Middle Passages* lecture, he uses the limbo refrain to challenge the
audience: "Limbo is a psychophysical ritual that awaits us. . . . We all
got to get under in order to get over."[^53]

{% include audio.html 
  url = "https://media.sas.upenn.edu/pennsound/authors/Brathwaite/Edmond-clips/18%20KB%20on%20the%20limbo%20Middle%20Passages%20lecture.mp3"
  title = "On the limbo"
%}


Here the popular dance becomes a figure for
the Middle Passage, just as it does in his poem "Caliban" from
*Islands*, the third part of Brathwaite's *Arrivants* trilogy.
Brathwaite even interrupts his 2004 Segue recording of "Caliban" to
underscore the symbolic significance of the limbo, thus offering another version of the poem that by directly
addressing the audience draws the listener in.[^54]

{% include audio.html 
  url = "https://media.sas.upenn.edu/pennsound/authors/Brathwaite/Edmond-clips/19%20KB%20Limbo%20Segue.mp3"
  title = "\"Caliban\" (extract) and discussion of the limbo"
%}

Similarly, in the
*Middle Passages* performance, Brathwaite uses the limbo to address the
audience directly and demand a response.[^55] The performance thus draws
attention to the embodied situation of listener and performer through
the embodied process of the limbo dance. In this way Brathwaite produces
a poetic practice that demands response—sounding, listening, and being
heard, not being "mum," silent, or "dumb." [^56]

{% include audio.html 
  url = "https://media.sas.upenn.edu/pennsound/authors/Brathwaite/Edmond-clips/20%20KB%20on%20mum%20Middle%20Passages%20lecture%20reading.mp3"
  title = "On \"the society of mum\""
%}

{% include audio.html 
  url = "https://media.sas.upenn.edu/pennsound/authors/Brathwaite/Edmond-clips/6%20shepherd%20extract.mp3"
  title = "\"Shepherd\" (extract)"
%}


Brathwaite's challenge suggests the political importance of close
listening—of an approach to teaching that refuses the "mum" of silent
close reading in favor of the sound of the recorded word. "Reading is an
isolated, individualistic expression," Brathwaite argues. "The oral
tradition on the other hand makes demands not only on the griot but the
audience to complete the community. The noise and sounds that the maker
makes are responded to by the audience and are returned to him."[^57]
Listening to Brathwaite perform and discuss the limbo allows students to
recognize the dance as a central figure for the embodied act of
performing and listening—for Brathwaite's "Caribbean-centered vision of
the complex conversation between self and community."[^58]
Simultaneously, it allows them to grasp how the dancer's bent body
registers the paradoxical situation whereby reliving the Middle Passage
becomes a source of strength.

Close listening enables students to hear such unexpected shifts and
paradoxes in Brathwaite's performances. In particular, students become
aware of how performance complicates Brathwaite's claim of producing an
authentic, "total Caribbean experience."[^59]

{% include audio.html 
  url = "https://media.sas.upenn.edu/pennsound/authors/Brathwaite/Edmond-clips/21%20KB%20total%20experience%20IPF%201987.mp3"
  title = "On the opening lines of \"Calypso\" as coming \"out of a total Caribbean experience\""
%}


Listening, we do not know where the poem is leading, and
so we must pay attention to the twists and turns of performance.
Brathwaite emphasizes this uncertainty at the start of his performances
by, for example, claiming, "I'm going to try something that I have never
tried before," or "I can't be certain about anything—I might not even be
able to read at all."[^60] Each performance is something new; thus
authenticity in his poetry is not something essential but continuously
in flux.

In his 2004 Segue reading in New York City, Brathwaite provides just
such an unexpected twist by improvising a new version of the poem "The
Twist" at the conclusion of his performance. In this new version
Brathwaite returns to the poem that he had performed earlier in the
reading, but this time, to conclude his performance, he dramatically
alters the final verse, presenting the poem as a self-referential
comment on his appearance on stage "on a night like this," the poem's final line.[^61]

{% include audio.html 
  url = "https://media.sas.upenn.edu/pennsound/authors/Brathwaite/Edmond-clips/22%20KB%20Twist%20reprise%20Segue.mp3"
  title = "Reprise of \"The Twist,\" Segue reading"
%}

In his 1988
International Poetry Forum performance, however, Brathwaite locates the
poem in the context of the aborted US Bay of Pigs invasion of Cuba and
his own return to the Caribbean, to a situation of neocolonial
entrapment: "The go-go girls . . . are still trapped in this eternal
treadmill, . . . the ghetto becoming a necklace, . . . not of beauty but
of a kind of neoslavery."[^62] 

{% include audio.html 
  url = "https://media.sas.upenn.edu/pennsound/authors/Brathwaite/Edmond-clips/23%20KB%20Twist%20comment%20IPF%201988.mp3"
  title = "On \"neoslavery\" and \"The Twist\""
%}


The
apparent hopelessness of this latter context contrasts with the perhaps
more hopeful lines in the Segue reprise: "Feel the hunger, feel the
passion pull upon your strings, watch her, twist her, love her on a
night like this." Together the two contexts also highlight the
problematic position of the poet as performer embodying a situation that
might be, as he describes the English language, both "a model and a
prison."[^63] 

{% include audio.html 
  url = "https://media.sas.upenn.edu/pennsound/authors/Brathwaite/Edmond-clips/24%20KB%20IPF%201987%20model%20and%20prison.mp3"
  title = "On English as \"a model and a prison\""
%}

That is, on the one
hand, performance offers up the possibility of a genuine communal
situation and so of "love." But on the other, performance presents a
potentially exploitative situation, one that parallels both the
prostitution of the "shanty town . . . girls," and also the manipulation
of the audience by the poet, who, like the dancer, pulls "upon your
strings."

"The Twist," then, highlights how slavery has been exchanged for the
neocolonial sex slavery of prostitution fed by US tourism and by the US
Marines to whose colonial presence in the region Brathwaite refers in
introducing the poem in his 1988 International Poetry Forum performance.
But hearing the poem also links this situation to the act of performance
itself by implicating the listener and the poet in this situation of
voyeurism and exploitation. The attractiveness of the song as performed
by Brathwaite belies its depiction of suffering and so parallels the
attractiveness of the dancers, which hides their desperation. In his
2004 Segue reading in New York, Brathwaite presents the limbo as both a
form of nightclub entertainment and a reenactment of the cruel,
back-breaking suffering and labor of the Middle Passage and slavery.
Similarly, in the same New York performance, Brathwaite performs "The
Twist" to focus attention on the cruel suffering underlying the smiling
face of entertainment for the tourist and, by implication, for the
literary armchair traveler to exotic locations.

Yet, as I note to my students, the relationship between performance,
exploitation, and emancipation is even more critical and complex in "The
Twist" and in Brathwaite's poetry generally. After all, Brathwaite, in
"Jazz and the West Indian Novel," responds to Walcott's assertion that
"we must teach our philosophy to reach above the navel" by arguing, "It
is around this very navel that the battle ranges. The alternative
tradition is belly-centred: in the beat, in the drum, the apparent
bawdy"; it is "belly-drum centred."[^64] Similarly, in "Calypso"
Brathwaite appeals to the calypso as the locus of a "total Caribbean
experience," even as the poem acknowledges that this appeal seems to
reinforce what Rohlehr terms the "new minstrel stereotype" of the
mid-twentieth-century "image of the Trinidadian as a happy-go-lucky
calypso-singing masquerader."[^65] Listening to the Segue recording,
students hear Brathwaite pose the question "How can we succeed?" They
also hear him identify an answer to that question in the "belly-drum
centred" tradition developed throughout the reading, from the "it / it /
it" of "Negus" through the "*Kon kon
kon kon* / *kun kun kun kun*" of "Atumpan" and the "dumb /
dumb / dumb" of "Shepherd" to the
revolutionary "beat dem drums / dem" drumbeat of "Wings of a Dove."[^66] 

{% include audio.html 
  url = "https://media.sas.upenn.edu/pennsound/authors/Brathwaite/Edmond-clips/14%20KB%20it%20it%20from%20Negus%20Segue.mp3"
  title = "\"Negus\" (opening lines)"
%}

{% include audio.html 
  url = "https://media.sas.upenn.edu/pennsound/authors/Brathwaite/Edmond-clips/3%20Atumpan.mp3"
  title = "\"Atumpan\""
%}

{% include audio.html 
  url = "https://media.sas.upenn.edu/pennsound/authors/Brathwaite/Edmond-clips/6%20shepherd%20extract.mp3"
  title = "\"Shepherd\" (extract)"
%}

The passage of this
drumbeat recalls Brathwaite's account of the dancer of the limbo as a
symbolic reenactment of the Middle Passage. The drumbeat allows the
voice to emerge from its very dumbness—out of the nadar, nothingness,
and silence of the literal and metaphorical Middle Passage—into the
"Kingdom of the word," a word
that Brathwaite extends into a long wavering note in his Segue
performance of "Negus."[^67] 

{% include audio.html 
  url = "https://media.sas.upenn.edu/pennsound/authors/Brathwaite/Edmond-clips/26%20KB%20Negus%20Segue%20kingdom%20of%20word.mp3"
  title = "\"Kingdom of the word,\" extract from \"Negus\""
%}

Close listening to "The Twist" in the context of the Segue reading thus
underscores the interplay between exploitation and emancipation in
Brathwaite's poetics through the poem's affirmation of rhythm and music
emerging from injustice and suffering and through the way this tension
revolves around the poet's act of performance. The turns of meaning in
"The Twist" make the poem a figure for Brathwaite's performative
poetics, most powerfully and unsettlingly evident and teachable through
close listening to the digital archive of his recordings.

Many of the critical relationships––between versions on the page and in
performance, between oral traditions and audio-recording technologies,
between the performer and the performance––that one can explore in
Brathwaite's work through a close listening approach are equally
important to classroom teaching. A final reason for close listening to
Brathwaite is that it makes us, as teachers, address the demands that
the classroom places on our students and ourselves to be close listeners
and performers, aware of all the twists and turns that our shared acts
of speaking and listening might bring.

---

[^1]: Early examples of the increased attention to the audio text can be
    found in Douglas Kahn and Gregory Whitehead, eds., *Wireless
    Imagination: Sound, Radio, and the Avant-Garde* (Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, 1992); Adalaide Morris, ed.,
    *Sound States: Innovative Poetics and Acoustical Technologies*
    (Chapel Hill: University of North Carolina Press, 1997); and Charles
    Bernstein, ed., *Close Listening: Poetry and the Performed Word* (New York: Oxford University
    Press, 1998)*.*

[^2]: For example, Lesley Wheeler, *Voicing American Poetry: Sound and
    Performance from the 1920s to the Present* (Ithaca, NY: Cornell
    University Press, 2008); Susan B. A. Somers-Willett, *The Cultural Politics of Slam Poetry: Race, Identity, and the Performance of Popular Verse in America* (Ann Arbor: University
    of Michigan Press, 2009); Tyler Hoffman, *American Poetry in
    Performance: From Walt Whitman to Hip Hop* (Ann Arbor: University of
    Michigan Press, 2011); Jill S. Kuhnheim, *Beyond the Page: Poetry
    and Performance in Spanish America* (Tucson: University of Arizona
    Press, 2014); Javon Johnson, *Killing Poetry: Blackness and the
    Making of Slam and Spoken Word Communities* (New Brunswick, NJ:
    Rutgers University Press, 2017); Juha Virtanen, *Poetry and
    Performance during the British Poetry Revival, 1960–1980: Event and
    Effect* (Cham, Switzerland: Palgrave Macmillan, 2017); Lytle Shaw,
    *Narrowcast: Poetry and Audio Research* (Stanford, CA: Stanford
    University Press, 2018); and Wendy R. Williams, *Listen to the Poet:
    Writing, Performance, and Community in Youth Spoken Word Poetry*
    (Amherst: University of Massachusetts Press, 2018).

[^3]: See the Poetry Archive, <https://poetryarchive.org>, and PennSound,
    a project of the Center for Programs in Contemporary Writing,
    University of Pennsylvania,
    <https://www.writing.upenn.edu/pennsound>. Although Caribbean poets
    are generally underrepresented in these archives, PennSound does
    contain numerous digital and digitized recordings of Brathwaite's
    work (<http://writing.upenn.edu/pennsound/x/Brathwaite.php>), and
    according to Janet Neigh, the Poetry Archive, thanks to the
    Caribbean Poetry Project, "features more Caribbean poets than most."
    See Janet Neigh, "Digitizing the 'Sound Explosions' of Anglophone
    Caribbean Performance Poetry," *archipelagos journal*, no. 1 (June
    2016),
    <https://archipelagosjournal.org/issue01/neigh-digitizing.html>.

[^4]: Anne Walmsley, *The Caribbean Artists Movement, 1966*–*1972: A
    Literary and Cultural History* (London: New Beacon, 1992), 83. See
    also Jacob Edmond, "Global Rhythms: Setting the Stage for World
    Poetry in 1960s London," *University of Toronto Quarterly* 88, no. 2
    (2019): 269; and Jacob Edmond, *Make It the Same: Poetry in the Age
    of Global Media* (New York: Columbia University Press, 2019), 35–36.

[^5]: Brathwaite recollects that, prior to the
    performance, the editor's advisors had "suggested to him that it
    \["Rites"\] should be taken out . . . on the grounds that it would
    not communicate to their public." Kamau Brathwaite, International
    Poetry Forum performance, recorded 7 February 1988, Pittsburgh,
    PennSound,
    <https://media.sas.upenn.edu/pennsound/authors/Brathwaite/Brathwaite-Kamau\_Intl-Poetry-Forum\_Pitts\_Feb-7-1988.mp3>,
    at 32:52–33:10.

[^6]: Gordon Rohlehr, "West Indian Poetry: Some Problems of Assessment,"
    part 2, *Bim* 14, no. 55 (1972): 134; Elaine Savory, introduction to
    *Middle Passages: A Lecture*, by Kamau Brathwaite, recorded 18 July
    2005 at Ryerson University, Toronto, CD, Sandberry Press, 2006, at
    4:57–5:28.

[^7]: Kamau Brathwaite, *History of the Voice: The Development of Nation
    Language in Anglophone Caribbean Poetry* (London: New Beacon, 1984),
    17; Kamau Brathwaite, *Middle Passages: A Lecture*, at 38:48–52:00.

[^8]: See Loretta Collins, "Rude Bwoys, Riddim, Rub-a-dub, and Rastas:
    Systems of Political Dissonance in Caribbean Performative Sounds,"
    in *Sound States: Innovative Poetics and Acoustical Technologies*,
    ed. Adalaide Morris (Chapel Hill: University of North Carolina
    Press, 1997), 185–88; and Kenneth Sherwood, "Elaborate Versionings:
    Characteristics of Emergent Performance in Three Print/Oral/Aural
    Poets," *Oral Tradition* 21, no. 1 (2006): 132–36.

[^9]: The eCompanion of four audio files that accompanies Sherwood's
    "Elaborate Versionings" (as well as a downloadable PDF of the essay)
    are at
    <https://journal.oraltradition.org/elaborate-versionings-characteristics-of-emergent-performance-in-three-print-oral-aural-poets>.
    At the end of the essay Sherwood includes a transcription of
    Brathwaite's recorded performance of "Angel/Engine" side by side
    with the print version.

[^10]: Michael E. Veal, *Dub: Soundscapes and Shattered Songs in
    Jamaican Reggae* (Middletown, CT: Wesleyan University Press, 2007),
    55.

[^11]: Dick Hebdige, *Cut 'n' Mix: Culture, Identity, and Caribbean
    Music* (New York: Methuen, 1987), 12.

[^12]: Evelyn O'Callaghan, *Woman Version: Theoretical Approaches to
    West Indian Fiction by Women* (New York: St Martin's, 1993). 

[^13]: Kamau Brathwaite, *The Poet and His Place in Barbadian Culture*
    (Bridgetown: Central Bank of Barbados, 1987), 19.

[^14]: Kamau Brathwaite, "Six Poems," *Kyk-Over-Al*, no. 27 (December
    1960): 83–86.

[^15]: Veal, *Dub*, 216–17, 214.

[^16]: Kamau Brathwaite, liner notes to *The Arrivants: A New World
    Trilogy*, CD, Savacou North SA 001, 2001. Although it is presented
    partly in the third person, this description of the recording
    process is almost certainly written by Brathwaite himself. The
    entire note is attributed to "a dream by Kamau Brathwaite" and
    shifts freely between third and first person.

[^17]: For more on this 1965 recording of *Rights of Passage*, see the
    liner notes to *The Arrivants*; Walmsley, *Caribbean Artists
    Movement*, 41; and Kamau Brathwaite,"Comments on CAM Text," part
    2, 1 January 1991, 19, Caribbean Artists Movement: Papers of Anne
    Walmsley, GB 2904 CAM/14/1/2, George Padmore Institute Archive,
    London. I know of no extant copies of this 1965 recording nor of the recording of his
    *History of the Voice* lecture, which Brathwaite notes was one of the items
    in his archive damaged or destroyed by Hurricane Gilbert. See Sonya
    Posmentier, *Cultivation and Catastrophe: The Lyric Ecology of
    Modern Black Literature* (Baltimore, MD: Johns Hopkins University
    Press, 2017), 193.

[^18]: Gordon Rohlehr, *Pathfinder: Black Awakening in "The Arrivants"
    of Edward Kamau Brathwaite* (Tunapuna, Trinidad: Gordon Rohlehr,
    1981), 333–40.

[^19a]: MP3s of these poems are at http://writing.upenn.edu/pennsound/x/Brathwaite.php: "Negus" (extract: 4:17–35), "The Twist" (first version), "Atumpan," "Caliban" (extract: 8:20–32), "Shepherd" (extract: 00:00–27), and "Wings of a Dove" (extract: 1:40–1:53), recorded at the Bowery Poetry Club, 1 May 2004, New York City, are found under "Segue Reading." "Soweto" is in the 1988 International Poetry Forum recording, at 47:00 (extract 56:33–57:12). 

[^19b]: "Nights" is in the recording of Cross-Cultural Poetics, radio show hosted by Leonard Schwartz, show no. 94 (2005), at 12:59 (extract: 15:42–58). "Angel/Engine," recorded 19 October 1997 at "XCP: Cross-Cultural Poetics Conference," is under its own heading (extract: 0:00–27); also available in the eCompanion to Sherwood, "Elaborate Versionings" (see note 9).

[^20]: See Nathaniel Mackey, "Other: From Noun to Verb,"
    *Representations* 39 (1992): 52. Kelly Josephs's essay "Versions of
    *X/Self*" is typical of this common emphasis on these print Sycorax
    video-style versions; see Kelly Baker Josephs, "Versions of
    *X/Self*: Kamau Brathwaite's Caribbean Discourse," *Anthurium* 1,
    no. 1 (2003): n. p. I use *versioning* rather than *revision*, the
    term Savory favors in her account of mainly page-based versions of
    Brathwaite's poems, in order to the underscore how Brathwaite's
    recording practice is analogous to dub versioning with its rejection of
    the notion of an original version, a rejection that Savory herself
    notes is critical to Brathwaite's iterative poetics. See Elaine
    Savory, "Journey from Catastrophe to Radiance: A Review Essay
    Locating Kamau Brathwaite's *Words Need Love Too* (2000) in the
    Context of his Life and Work," *Transition* 99, no. 1 (2008):
    126–47, doi: 10.1353/tra.0.0077.

[^21]: Kamau Brathwaite, *Barabajan Poems: 1492–1992* (New York: Savacou
    North, 1994). On the links between Brathwaite’s video-style and his recorded performances, see also Graeme Rigby, "Publishing Brathwaite: Adventures in
    the Video Style," *World Literature Today* 68 (1994): 710.

[^22]: Kamau Brathwaite, "Rwanda," part 3 of "New Gods of the Middle
    Passages," *Kamau Monograph*, Caribbean Quarterly Monograph Series
    (Mona, Jamaica: Caribbean Quarterly; University of West Indies, n.d.
    \[2002?\]): 123–42.

[^23]: Kamau Brathwaite, introduction to "The Rwanda Poems," track 2 of
    *Kamau Brathwaite and Allen Ginsberg* (extract: 0:42–57), recorded 6
    October 1994, CD, Academy of American Poets, 2004.

[^24]: See Brathwaite, International Poetry Forum performance, recorded
    10 February 1987, Pittsburgh, and 1988 International Poetry Forum
    performance, PennSound. See also Brathwaite, *Middle Passages: A
    Lecture*.

[^25]: Brathwaite, transition from "Atumpan" to "Naming," Segue reading
    (complete reading), PennSound (extract: 13:20–14:45).

[^26]: Savory, "Journey from Catastrophe," 136.

[^27]: Kamau Brathwaite, "Kumina," in *Born to Slow Horses* (Lebanon,
    NH: University Press of New England, 2005), 2006 Griffin Poetry
    Prize performance,
    <http://www.griffinpoetryprize.com/see-and-hear-poetry/a-g/kamau-brathwaite>.

[^28]: Brathwaite, Segue reading (complete reading), PennSound (extract:
    40:24–41:05).

[^29]: Sherwood, "Elaborate Versionings," 134.

[^30a]: Edward Kamau Brathwaite, *Sun Poem* (Oxford: Oxford University Press, 1982), 100.
    
[^30b]: Kamau Brathwaite, 1987 International Poetry Forum performance,
    PennSound (extract: 34:31–37:51).

[^31]: Gertrude Stein, *Gertrude Stein: Writings, 1932–1946*, ed.
    Catharine R. Stimpson and Harriet Chessman (New York: Library of
    America, 1998), 288.

[^32]: Kamau Brathwaite, "Negus," in *The Arrivants: A New World
    Trilogy* (London: Oxford University Press, 1973), 224; Brathwaite,
    1987 International Poetry Forum performance, PennSound (extract:
    2:19–38).

[^33]: Brathwaite, "Negus," Segue reading (extract: 0:00–0:21). See
    Rohlehr, *Pathfinder*, 262*.*

[^34]: Brathwaite's versionings of "Negus" can be heard in "Nation
    Language and Other Revolutions," *Cross-Cultural Poetics*, radio
    show hosted by Leonard Schwartz, show number 16, recorded 2 February
    2004, PennSound, at 3:10; International Poetry Forum performance,
    recorded 3 November 1999, *International Poetry Forum Archive*,
    <http://ipf.carlow.edu/Files/149a13c1-aca4-e741-9c02-bcd916c5f3d4.mp3>,
    at 19:29; *Poetry in Performance*, vol. 2, CD, 57 Productions, 2003;
    "The Rwanda Poems," *Kamau Brathwaite and Allen Ginsberg*; and Segue
    reading, PennSound.

[^35]: Brathwaite, *History of the Voice*, 17–18.

[^36]: Ibid., 17.

[^37]: Brathwaite, 1987 International Poetry Forum performance,
    PennSound (extract: 9:40–11:24).

[^38]: The rhythm of Brathwaite's performance conforms closely to
    Shannon Dudley's representation of the basic perceived calypso beat.
    Shannon Dudley, "Judging 'By the Beat': Calypso versus Soca,"
    *Ethnomusicology* 40, no. 2 (1996): 277, fig. 4c.

[^39]: Ibid., 272.

[^40]: Derek Walcott, in William Baer, ed., *Conversations with Derek
    Walcott* (Jackson: University Press of Mississippi, 1996), 62.
    Walcott's comment came a year after Brathwaite presented the first
    version of his "History of the Voice" lecture at the 1976 Carifesta
    in Jamaica. In the lecture, Brathwaite discusses how Walcott's
    poetry deploys Caribbean language and idiom (what Brathwaite calls
    "nation language"), but he also identifies a colonial residue in
    Walcott's commitment to the pentameter.

[^41]: Brathwaite, "Ancestors," 1987 International Poetry Forum
    performance, PennSound, at 16:39 (extract 19:35–20:13); and
    "Soweto," 1988 International Poetry Forum performance, PennSound, at
    47:02 (extract 56:50–57:07). In the text I follow the typographic
    treatment Brathwaite gives "Soweto" in *Middle Passages* (New York:
    New Directions, 1992), 83.

[^42]: Brathwaite, "Angel/Engine," found in the eCompanion to Sherwood,
    "Elaborate Versionings"; at PennSound; and in the 1999 International
    Poetry Forum performance, *International Poetry Forum Archive*, at
    1:08:00.

[^43]: Brathwaite, "Kumina" and "The Twist," in Segue reading,
    PennSound*.*

[^44]: Brathwaite, "The Dust," 1999 International Poetry Forum
    performance, *International Poetry Forum Archive*, at 38:14; and
    "Rites," 1988 International Poetry Forum performance, PennSound, at
    36:15.

[^45]: Charles W. Pollard, *New World Modernisms: T. S. Eliot, Derek
    Walcott, and Kamau Brathwaite* (Charlottesville: University of
    Virginia Press, 2004), 136. Other accounts of Brathwaite's echoes of
    Eliot can be found in Matthew Hart, *Nations of Nothing but Poetry:
    Modernism, Transnationalism, and Synthetic Vernacular Writing* (New
    York: Oxford University Press, 2010); and Jahan Ramazani, "A
    Transnational Poetics," *American Literary History* 18, no. 2
    (2006): 332–59.

[^46]: "Listening to Eliot" is the title of a chapter in Pollard's *New
    World Modernisms*.

[^47]: Brathwaite, *History* *of the Voice*, 30–31n41.

[^48]: For example, one student, Zoe Taptiklis, created a playlist of
    recordings of poetry and music in response to the work of Brathwaite
    and Ishion Hutchinson. See "The Playlist,"
    *Braithwaite&Hutchinson—Anthologies of Sound: Listening to the
    Caribbean*,
    <https://braithwaitehutchinson.wordpress.com/the-playlist>.

[^49]: Brathwaite, *History of the Voice*, 17.

[^50]: The published version of *History of the Voice* is an edited transcription of the lecture as delivered in Cambridge, Massachusetts, as part of the 1979 English Institute at Harvard University. However, despite contacting the transcriber, Houston Baker Jr., I have been unable to locate a copy of the recording. The lecture was first presented at Carifesta in Kingston, Jamaica, in 1976. However, only the question-and-answer session—not the lecture itself—is preserved on tape in the archives of the Library of the Spoken Word at the University of West Indies, Mona. See Sonya Posmentier, *Cultivation and Catastrophe: The Lyric Ecology of Modern Black Literature* (Baltimore, MD: Johns Hopkins University Press, 2017), 193.

[^51]: Loretta Collins, "From the 'Crossroads of Space' to the
    (Dis)Koumforts of Home: Radio and the Poet as Transmuter of the Word
    in Kamau Brathwaite's 'Meridian' and *Ancestors*," *Anthurium* 1,
    no. 1 (2003): n.p., <doi:10.33596/anth.2>.

[^52]: Pollard, *New World Modernisms*, 126.

[^53]: Brathwaite, *Middle Passages: A Lecture* (extract: 41:11–42:53;
    quotation: 42:22–42:48).

[^54]: Brathwaite, "Caliban," Segue reading, PennSound (extract:
    3:42–7:42).

[^55]: Brathwaite, *Middle Passages: A Lecture*, at 41:11–42:53.

[^56]: Brathwaite, *Middle Passages: A Lecture* (extract: 3:36–49).
    Brathwaite, "Shepherd," in *The Arrivants*, 185; and Segue reading,
    PennSound (extract: 00:00–27).

[^57]: Brathwaite, *History of the Voice*, 18–19.

[^58]: Elaine Savory, "The Word Becomes *Nam*: Self and Community in the
    Poetry of Kamau Brathwaite, and Its Relation to Caribbean Culture
    and Postmodern Theory," in *Writing the Nation: Self and Country in
    the Post-colonial Imagination*, ed. John Charles Hawley (New York:
    Rodopi, 1996), 38.

[^59]: Brathwaite, 1987 International Poetry Forum performance,
    PennSound (extract: 11:10–23).

[^60]: Ibid., at 0:16; Segue reading, PennSound, at 3:38.

[^61]: Brathwaite, "The Twist" reprise (no. 14), Segue reading,
    PennSound.

[^62]: Brathwaite, 1988 International Poetry Forum performance,
    PennSound, at 20:17–22:09.

[^63]: Brathwaite, 1987 International Poetry Forum performance,
    PennSound, at 0:39–1:06.

[^64]: Kamau Brathwaite, "Jazz and the West Indian Novel," in *Roots*
    (Ann Arbor: University of Michigan Press, 1993), 74, 75. Brathwaite
    refers to a phrase from Walcott's poem "Tales of the Islands":
    "Teach our philosophy the strength to reach / Above the navel."
    Derek Walcott, *The Poetry of Derek Walcott, 1948–2013*, ed. Glyn
    Maxwell (New York: Farrar, Straus and Giroux, 2014), 31.

[^65]: Brathwaite, 1987 International Poetry Forum performance,
    *PennSound*, at 11:20–23; Rohlehr, *Pathfinder*, 101.

[^66]: Brathwaite, "Atumpan," Segue reading; Brathwaite, "Shepherd,"
    Segue reading (extract: 00:00–27); Brathwaite, "Negus," Segue
    reading (extract: 0:00–0:21); and "Wings of a Dove," Segue reading,
    PennSound (extract: 3:04–14).

[^67]: Brathwaite, "Negus," Segue reading, PennSound (extract:
    0:33–0:50).
