---
layout: article
section: articles
title: 
  "long": "Culture Jamming in the Caribbean: A Case of Alternative Media through Double Alternativity in Trinidad and Tobago"
  "short": "Culture Jamming in the Caribbean"
doi: "https://doi.org/10.7916/archipelagos-fx7k-bj27"
author: 
- name: Jonathan J. Felix
  shortname: Felix
  bio: >
    Jonathan J. Felix is a transdisciplinary academic at the intersection of sociology, design, media, and cultural studies. His research interests include higher education, digital cultures, and alternative media. Jonathan is a Visiting Fellow with the International and Comparative Education Research Group with the Universiti Brunei Darussalam (ICE-UBD) and an Associate Fellow with the Higher Education Academy (AFHEA). He is also a member of Design Objective (DO), the International Communication Association (ICA), and the Media, Communications, and Cultural Studies Association (MeCCSA). With more than seventeen years of collective experience in the creative industries and higher education, he has worked independently and collaboratively in a range of roles related to teaching, leadership, and research. He currently develops and coordinates the delivery of communication literacies and research skills for courses in cultural studies, communication, and design theory, in addition to practical digital media skills. Favoring textual research methods and publishing in traditional and alternative modes of scholarship, his work is influenced by poststructuralist and continental philosophical schools of thought.
date: December 2020
issue: 5
order: 2
abstract: >
  This essay serves as a written counterpart to a previously published visual case study that explored the cultural production of Caribbean creative Warren Le Platte and his creation of an internet meme series in 2016. In a continuation of that analysis here, Le Platte's work is again positioned as an articulation of *alternative media*, a concept defined by subversive, disruptive, or interrogative strategies in response to inequitable relations and power dynamics. Employed as a reflexive critique of his home island of Trinidad, Le Platte's work raises questions regarding the cultural logic of dysfunctionality underscored by his personal experience as a citizen. By employing a visual discourse analysis, this essay continues to explore alternative media in the Caribbean and how activities of "prosumption" (production + consumption) intersect with practices related to language, identity, and cultural memory in this context. 
abstract_fr: >
  This essay serves as a written counterpart to a previously published visual case study that explored the cultural production of Caribbean creative Warren Le Platte and his creation of an internet meme series in 2016. In a continuation of that analysis here, Le Platte's work is again positioned as an articulation of *alternative media*, a concept defined by subversive, disruptive, or interrogative strategies in response to inequitable relations and power dynamics. Employed as a reflexive critique of his home island of Trinidad, Le Platte's work raises questions regarding the cultural logic of dysfunctionality underscored by his personal experience as a citizen. By employing a visual discourse analysis, this essay continues to explore alternative media in the Caribbean and how activities of "prosumption" (production + consumption) intersect with practices related to language, identity, and cultural memory in this context.  
abstract_es: >
  This essay serves as a written counterpart to a previously published visual case study that explored the cultural production of Caribbean creative Warren Le Platte and his creation of an internet meme series in 2016. In a continuation of that analysis here, Le Platte's work is again positioned as an articulation of *alternative media*, a concept defined by subversive, disruptive, or interrogative strategies in response to inequitable relations and power dynamics. Employed as a reflexive critique of his home island of Trinidad, Le Platte's work raises questions regarding the cultural logic of dysfunctionality underscored by his personal experience as a citizen. By employing a visual discourse analysis, this essay continues to explore alternative media in the Caribbean and how activities of "prosumption" (production + consumption) intersect with practices related to language, identity, and cultural memory in this context.
language: en
pdf: true
---



Introduction
------------

Public discourse possesses its own distinct features in the "attention
economy" of online social networks in various digital spaces bound by
features such as language, identity, cultural memory, and nationality.
What is interesting here is how locality bears on the content and
creative forms of communicative expressions and how clusters of
knowledge are prioritized. In this essay I explore the communication of
public discourse through the concept of *alternative media*. My work
here focuses on a case of an unusual articulation of the common
internet-based practice of "culture jamming" in Trinidad and Tobago,
which in this instance is manifest through the phenomena of internet
memes. Given that culture jamming is a critical practice, I will give
priority to the conceptual framework of alternative media as a means of
situating this critical activity in keeping with the way it has been
constructed by several scholars.

In general, internet memes can be better understood by first
understanding the source material used to create the memetic derivative.
This can often lead to a more defined understanding of performative
dimension of the internet meme itself and the ways it may find
circulation and currency in cyberspace. This is the case of the memes in
the work of the creative practitioner Warren Le Platte, featured in this
essay. I turn my attention in particular to the idiosyncrasies of Le
Platte's meme constellation and how the collection has functioned
online.

Even with the range of critical and creative practices within Caribbean
culture, regional and international scholars have not conceptualized
these practices according to the variety of alternative media frameworks
that exist. Given the scarcity of references to Caribbean alternative
media in existing scholarship, this essay will attempt to contribute to
this critical dialogue by means of a specific case study in which an
atypical articulation of internet memes was created and circulated
online.[^1] In addition to the alternative media gap in the literature,
a history of cultural jamming in Trinidad and Tobago has also not been
documented, although some authors have attempted to engage with
histories of digital culture there, particularly through studies on
social media and other online platforms.[^2]

Notwithstanding these attempts, my aim here is not to provide an
overview of internet memes or culture jamming in the context of Trinidad
and Tobago but rather to situate an instance of this practice within the
broader scope of alternative media scholarship relating to digital
media. This essay also attempts to delineate an instance of "double
alternativity," in which an articulation of alternative media is further
subverted or disrupted, resulting in a novel form that departs from
standard practices of counter discursive action. I introduce and employ
the term "meme constellation" to describe the atypical instance of
double alternativity discussed here.

Alternative Media, Culture Jamming, and Public Discourse
--------------------------------------------------------

As a concept, *alternative media* positions practices and products of
cultural production not simply as interpretations of information but as
efforts to close the gap between production and consumption activities
mediated through centralized institutions or traditional mass media
structures.[^3] Practices, processes, and artifacts that fit within this
designation can also be seen as expressions of resistance from the
"counterpublics" against a particular locus of power.[^4] Alternative
media concerns itself with structures of discourse and the relations of
power that are at play in the polyvocal expressions of both dominant and
marginal entities.[^5] Chris Atton summarizes his typology of
alternative media by providing a broad definition that unites various
articulations of this concept:

> Alternative and community media are media that bypass the usual
> channels of commercial production and distribution, and that are most
> often organised and produced by "ordinary" people, local communities
> and communities of interest. It is primarily interested in social and
> cultural practices that enable people to participate directly in the
> organisation, production and distribution of their own media, and how
> these media are used to construct and represent identity and
> community, as well as to present forms of information and knowledge
> that are under-represented, marginalised or ignored by other, more
> dominant media.[^6]

As a subdivision of alternative media, *culture jamming* usually entails
the grassroots hijacking of cultural units, which in turn are repurposed
through either recreation or reappropriation that results in a vastly
different or opposing message to the original context of the cultural
unit used.[^7] Existing cultural resources become the raw materials used
for alternative or countercultural discourses expressed through a
variety of creative forms, such as the various examples of image macro
internet memes that will be discussed later in my analysis. While
culture jamming has its roots in the activist efforts of the
Situationists in the 1960s and their similar practice of *détournement*,
culture jamming is not always associated with activism.[^8] Détournement
usually entailed the reappropriation of film and literature in an
attempt to reconfigure these outputs either to convey informational and
ideological content that often stood in contrast to their dominant
interpretations or to serve the anticapitalistic sentiments of the
Situationists.

The alternative media framework considers the relationship between form,
content, distribution, and the social functioning of a text as it
pertains to the notion of active audiences in their negotiated and
oppositional decoding of "mainstream" practices in popular culture or
dominant discourses.[^9] In what follows, I take into account the
subversion of traditional institutional constructs, creative processes,
social transmission, and oppositional agency, in addition to the
elements of language, identity, and cultural memory, in an example of
online public discourse in Trinidad and Tobago.

The communication of public discourse through internet memes has already
been identified by scholars as a subversive and popular form of
alternative media practice.[^10] Semiotic references within internet
memes can be seen as both a conceptual index and a point of departure
relating to the creation of ongoing discourse. To better understand the
case study presented in this essay, I first consider the phenomena of
internet memes more broadly and examine how this cultural and
communicative artifact or media functions in digital spaces.

Defining Internet Memes
-----------------------

Media scholar Patrick Davison primarily confines internet memes within
the realm of humor transmitted online.[^11] In Davison's theorization,
cultural information is "transmitted" through the meme form, whether
this information refers to processes, practices, or ideas. Davison also
observes that the formal characteristics and creative processes that
surround internet memes are key components in the participatory culture
of the internet, particularly through social media.[^12] By extension,
these components can also be theorized as alternative media, given their
usual "de-professionalized aesthetic" and disruptive form and content
creation,[^13] in contrast to more "refined" forms of cultural
production presented through traditional and commercial mass media
structures.[^14]

Within the Trinbagonian digital landscape, the *image macro* is the most
commonly used internet meme format circulated through local social media
outlets and news websites.[^15] This may be because of how easily this
meme form is transmitted by internet users, as well as how easy it is
for this format to be copied or manipulated (in contrast to a video or
an animated GIF image). Composed in most cases of a single image with a
superimposed word, phrase, or caption, the image macro is often used to
express pithiness, humor, or sarcasm.[^16] Sometimes the text is white
with a black outline; it may also be either completely black or white,
depending on the nature of the image.[^17] Figure 1 is an image macro
that bears the defining marks of a localized aesthetic and content,
given the comparative visual and textual reference.

While the term *meme* has its roots in the mid-1970s in Richard
Dawkins's ideas on sociocultural reproduction, in the early 1980s a more
concrete expression of the concept emerged, leading to how *meme* is now
commonly understood by Davison and other scholars over the last twenty
years. During this period, internet users were able to categorize
content for clarity using simple text, punctuation, and
alphanumeric-based characters, commonly known today as *emoticons*. The
need for this measure of clarity stemmed from the fact that in the early
days of online forums, it became a challenge for some users to
differentiate between humorous communication and other types of
exchanges.[^18]

{% include image.html
  img="issue05/felix/fig1.png"
  title="Natural Disasters"
  caption="Figure 1. This meme presents an unfavorable view of Trinidad and Tobago politician Colm Imbert. Source: *Meanwhile in T&T* (via Facebook)" 
%}

Ryan Milner comments that internet memes are part of the lingua franca
of the modern internet—a visual language representative of the cultural
dynamics of social media. He notes that cultural logics often operate in
tandem with contrasting social irrationalities to reinforce the binary
oppositions of cultural dynamics.[^19] Because cultures are composed of
varying modes of thought, dominant ideas usually define social
rationalities—in other words, normative patterns of sociocultural
thought and practice.

Yet ideas that fall outside dominant rationalities are often considered
irrational or as counter-rationalities that constitute the binary
between dominant and marginal discourses. The interplay between the
margins and center often influence paradigm shifts and cultural
articulation(s). In this regard, internet memes may express a variety of
rationalities and discourses. The internet memes featured in this essay
provide examples of a dominant online social practice and the expression
of a dominant discourse through a counter-rationality in an atypical
instance of culture jamming.

The Structure of Internet-Based Discourse
-----------------------------------------

The technological affordance of online social networking in digital
visual culture also calls attention to the development of participatory
practices in twenty-first-century societies, particularly concerning the
ways the digital public sphere is constructed today.[^20] In this
regard, "technological affordance" pertains to the way a device, media,
system, or configuration possesses characteristics that influence its
functionality.[^21] For example, the way online social networks provide
opportunities for the posting of multimedia content would in part
determine how these opportunities might be exploited in a given context.
With this understanding, social media functions as a nexus for mediated
interaction between individuals and groups by means of the potential
that is already part of its design through the connectivity of the
internet. Of importance in this sphere, I argue, is not just *what*
individuals and groups say but *how* they speak.

The internet operates as a networked index that functions as a site of
communication and transaction. These core features of the internet allow
for collaborative and participatory uses, as well as political ends,
since users are often engaged in wide-ranging forms of expression and
transmission.[^22] As such, the development of the internet and
corresponding technologies up to the present time has given rise to the
concept of "prosumption"—wherein the *production* and *consumption* of
information occur simultaneously. The once disparate acts of production
and consumption have now compounded into a singular, indivisible act,
becoming a dual expression of both participatory and autonomous
agency.[^23] Media scholar Melita Zajc further expounds on this idea:

> Rather than asking what social media are, the focus should be on
> exploring how they can be conceptualized in relation to their use. The
> tradition of audience studies within communication and media studies
> testifies to aspirations for a desired ideal of audience
> participation, an ideal that seems to have reached its fulfillment
> within participatory practices of social media. The scholarly
> community appears to be divided with regard to this fulfillment. The
> conceptual approach, based on the notion of the dispositive, shows
> that diverging processes can indeed take place within the same media
> use. This approach offers a more complex insight into the use of
> social media. It does not provide a one-sided answer about the
> potentials that social media offer for more substantial participation
> in political processes, in the interpretation of media texts, and in
> media production.[^24]

Moreover, ideas of the "the expert" or "professional" are undermined in
their linkage to centralized production, since a key aspect of
alternative media involves collective or participatory engagement made
possible through more inclusive access to the means of production and
channels of distribution.[^25] Davison points out that certain technical
and communicative limitations are among the many other contingencies
that influence the transgressive nature of internet memes.[^26] These
contingencies have greatly contributed to the decentered production of
internet memes, in contrast to the institutionalized production of the
traditional mass media industries that are often commercial in nature.

With social media use currently epitomizing prosumption in its fullness,
scholars have observed how the internet has blurred previously
established social and cultural demarcations, resulting in a variety of
ways relations of power are reconfigured.[^27] The *crowdsourcing* labor
model exemplifies this reconfiguration, since the internet serves as a
nexus for shared communication and creativity (between organizations and
online communities), resulting in mutual benefits that are the sum of
equitable relations of power.[^28] Similar to how participatory
communication and creativity are built on the production and consumption
of information, communication and creativity bear on how public
discourse is organized and understood. The construction and
communication of public discourse through alternative media in Trinidad
and Tobago underscores the significance of language, identity, and
cultural memory. With the internet as a space for social interaction,
internet memes, as a specific example in the following case study,
function as *signifiers* of matters of public interest. In this local
setting, the circulation and currency of internet memes manifest
particular patterns.

Given that the replication of structure and content is a defining aspect
of memes, these features suggest a form of "digital storytelling" in
which form eclipses authorship in the construction of "public
culture."[^29] As such, the ongoing significance of internet memes lies
in their growing evolution and preponderance, including the relationship
between these digital artifacts and the physical lifeworld. The "open"
nature of the internet reinforces the structure of social media, which
provides a participatory agency to users indicative of the influx of
content developed from the grassroots communities that eclipses the
centralized, formal institutionality of the mass media industries.[^30]

In this regard, media theorists Jean Burgess and Joshua Green suggest
that any attempt at understanding the cultural flow of the digital
landscape requires a shift in the way one views cultural production.
This requires a conceptual reorientation that positions online practices
via social media practices along a continuum of cultural production,
which favors prosumption, and a negation of the "professional versus
amateur" divide evident in more industrialized paradigms.[^31] In this
sense, according to Burgess and Green, social media usage presents a
range of modalities for the production and consumption of media, and as
such, social media platforms provide tools that enable individuals and
groups to produce and consume texts without positioning users as either
professionals or amateurs. In addition, social media bears the technical
infrastructure that allows for online communication insofar as it
provides an environment for various forms of participatory
practice.[^32]

Social Media and Internet Memes in Trinidad and Tobago
------------------------------------------------------

Facebook has been regarded as one of the world's most popular social
networks, and the nature of its design makes it the most participatory
social media platform to date.[^33] This is partly the result of
Facebook's construction as a convergent media platform, whereby a
variety of creative forms, content, and technologies intersect.[^34] By
design, Facebook is a relatively accessible platform for internet users
across a variety of digital devices and access points, unlike Instagram,
for example, which is by design primarily restricted to smartphone
usage.

Anthropologist Jolynna Sinanan identifies social media in Trinidad and
Tobago as a space often devoted to the idea of visibility or, more
specifically, to a sense of personal unpretentiousness. Facebook in
particular has been noted by researchers as a platform for locals to
negotiate both individual freedom and national community. As such,
Sinanan identifies *normativity* as the underlying value of online
discourse across Facebook in Trinidad and Tobago, as a confluence of
language, identity, and cultural memory.[^35] These features,
characteristic of Facebook use in Trinidad and Tobago, are neither
prominent nor evident in other foreign contexts.

Similarly, both Daniel Miller and Sinanan note that the visual content
found on online social networks in Trinidad and Tobago function as a
kind of visual language that often relies on memes. In light of this,
Miller and Sinanan argue that online discourse in Trinidad and Tobago
can be observed in the posting of content on social networks,
particularly Facebook, because these are instances wherein individuals
and groups function as "objects" that transmit and embody a range of
values they identify with through the use of language and the invocation
of cultural memory.[^36] Both Miller and Sinanan posit the idea that
sociocultural normativity is an overarching feature of social media use
in Trinidad and Tobago.[^37]

Let me point out that the content and circulation of local image macros
is the way cultural critique and social commentary are presented. In
addition, users construct a sense of local identity through the humor
and reflexivity of the images they post. Michele Knobel and Lankshear
also note in their work that these kinds of practices are connected to
meaning-making, identity formation, and cultural hierarchy:

> Analysis and dissection of online memes can be used to explore why
> some ideas are more easily replicated, are more fecund and have more
> longevity than others, and what the consequences of this are or might
> be. Studying online memes that aim at promoting social critique can
> help educators to rethink conventional approaches to critical literacy
> that all too often operate at the level of text analysis without
> taking sufficient account of the social practices, ideas, affinities
> and new forms of social participation and cultural production that
> generated the phenomenon under examination.[^38]

In the case of the usual articulation of culture jamming, local creative
professional Warren Le Platte produced a popular internet meme series
documenting a personal experience with a local franchise. This is an
unusual occurrence because most internet users do not produce memes as
sequential narratives. Furthermore, most meme creators remain
anonymous—that is, an internet meme usually functions to direct
attention to itself rather than to the person(s) who created it. I use
"meme constellation"—a single collection of memes having a unifying
theme, structure, or object—to describe the series produced by Le
Platte. This analysis takes into account the visual characteristics and
semiotic references that mark the series and considers how these bear on
the communication of public discourse.

Two key questions undergird my analysis here, namely, How do
image-and-text-based internet memes gain their currency across Trinidad
and Tobago's digital landscape? And what local discourses are
communicated through the internet meme form? Both issues have
significant implications regarding the agency of the (online) active
audience in Trinidad and Tobago and yield insight into the ways locals
negotiate their use of language, national identity, and cultural memory
through lived experience. Using textual analysis (*visual* and
*semiotic* analysis, respectively), a corresponding interpretive
discussion will follow.

Enter Warren Le Platte
----------------------

Before my detailed discussion of Warren Le Platte's experience and
subsequent work, I will first provide some context to his designation as
a creative professional. With a creative career spanning more than two
decades, Le Platte has grown to become a well-respected
multidisciplinary professional with a practice that includes
photography, graphic design, illustration, writing, and cartooning.[^39]
The range of Le Platte's practice has covered the realms of academia and
industry, and he has also been involved in local media and with carnival
festivities. In his ongoing work to develop and convey a visual language
that exemplifies a distinct Caribbean aesthetic, Le Platte's latest
venture has been the development of the board game "Santimanitay," based
on Trinidad and Tobago's cultural history and on a contemporary
articulation of carnival festivities.[^40] Le Platte's career and
visibility as a creative practitioner presents an interesting frame of
reference with which to better understand his internet meme
constellation.

In response to the worldwide March 2016 release of the popular film
*Batman v Superman: Dawn of Justice*, Le Platte posted on his personal
Facebook page a series of thirty-one internet memes utilizing local
vernacular. In doing this, Le Platte narrated his unsuccessful attempt
to view the film at one of the local multiplex franchises and an
unpleasant customer-service experience that followed. To summarize: Le
Platte had gone to considerable lengths to attend the cinema at the end
at an exhausting day at work, even missing an opportunity to purchase
some local cuisine. During the film's screening, technical difficulties
consistently interrupted the film, making it more-or-less impossible to
enjoy, yet he was unable to get a refund for his ticket.

In the end, Le Platte was unable to see the film he had anticipated and
was not offered a cash refund by the cinema staff, who he claims treated
him in a disagreeable fashion. Le Platte made a point to note that his
experience at this particular multiplex was a first for him and also a
foreign one, given the previous pleasant experiences he had had with
traditional and longstanding single-theater cinema outlets. Mere hours
after posting the series online, Le Platte's culture jamming activity
garnered several hundred interactions by local Facebook users, including
comments and shares, and went on to draw the attention of the
international media collective *Global Voices* (see fig. 2).[^41] In the
context of this example, at least five key elements are of importance.

{% include image.html
  img="issue05/felix/fig2.png"
  title="Warren Le Platte Facebook"
  caption="Figure 2. A screenshot of Le Platte's personal Facebook page with a snippet of his popular internet meme series. Source: Warren Le Platte (via Facebook)" %}

Firstly, the film Le Platte attempted to view at the local cinema was of
considerable popular interest both locally and worldwide, and both the
period of the film's international release and the creation of Le
Platte's series of memes coincided. More importantly, the film at the
center of Le Platte's narrative was a superhero film, featuring popular
characters such as Batman and Superman, along with others of DC Comics
lore, all of whom are part of the contemporary popular culture mythos.

Given this context, I argue that the *currency* of Le Platte's series
was connected to its *circulation*; at the same time, its *circulation*
was a result of its *currency*. While comic books are key artifacts of
popular culture, few comic book characters have as much
intergenerational popularity and widespread appeal as Batman, Superman,
and the other related franchised characters. Scholars have noted that
the popularity of comic book characters is linked to their ideological
signification, as well as to the social function of comic books and
graphic novels as narrative forms of entertainment and
identification.[^42]

John Fiske's theory of popular culture is useful here. Fiske posits that
meaning-making and the construction of social identity are but a sample
of various factors that influence the selection of pop-culture artifacts
that find currency among individuals and groups.[^43] However, Le
Platte's culture jamming practice involved the creation of derivative
work that had been twice removed from its initial context: the initial
reference in in popular media and its subsidiary use in existing
internet memes.

Secondly, the narrative constructed by Le Platte details a highly
unpleasant customer-service experience at a popular local establishment,
referencing the common narrative of poor customer service by
organizations in Trinidad and Tobago. Within this culture jamming
narrative, Le Platte thus positioned himself as a proxy for countless
other nationals who happen to share similar experiences and sentiments,
as evidenced by the online responses posted by local social media users.
This move by Le Platte reinforces public discourse on local *commess*
culture—local parlance for a cultural rationality of disorder.[^44]

Le Platte expresses the challenges he experienced in his moviegoing
efforts by referencing the commercially and critically acclaimed *Lord
of the Rings* film franchise, which is known for its unusually lengthy
screening times. In figure 3 Le Platte presents his experience at the
local cinema franchise as being tediously lengthy, given the technical
difficulties he encountered, by using a promotional image from the *Lord
of the Rings* film franchise; he also superimposes a promotional image
from the film he attempted to watch at the cinema. This juxtaposition
creates a hyperbolic comedic effect. As Le Platte likens his failure to
view *Batman v Superman* to watching another film franchise altogether,
he links his failed moviegoing experience to spending more time than
needed at the cinema.

Le Platte's placement of himself as a comic book character in his
personal narrative (see fig. 7) served as an ideological signifier for
prevailing ideas regarding the Trinbagonian experience of commess or
confusion, while also performing as an institutional critique. Moreover,
Le Platte's identity as author of this narrative plays an important role
in his identification of institutional dysfunctionality being a
prominent part of the local cultural landscape. He is identified as an
everyman, placed in an unusual circumstance of a failed movie-watching
attempt, yet still a very common occurrence with respect to bad customer
service and the impaired operation of local establishments. The local
rapport of Le Platte's meme constellation also underscores the
observation by Elad Segev, Asaf Nissenbaum, Nathan Stolero, and Limor
Shifman regarding the use of internet memes as prime vehicles for
mainstream discourses on popular culture.[^45] Their work on internet
memes highlights politics, an unpopular topic in alternative national
contexts, yet politics is far from being a marginal discourse within
Trinidad and Tobago's cultural landscape, as evidenced by the
institutional critique presented in Le Platte's culture jamming that
evokes a sense of national identity and cultural memory through the
mediated presentation of his lived experience.[^46]

{% include image.html
  img="issue05/felix/fig3.png"
  title="So I spend 4 hours in de cinema…"
  caption="Figure 3. A meme used in Le Platte's series referencing Peter Jackson's Lord of the Rings film trilogy, as Le Platte compares his moviegoing experience to that of watching an installment from the famously lengthy franchise. Source: Warren Le Platte (via Facebook)" %}

Thirdly, Le Platte employed the internet meme—one of the common
communication tools of the so-called digital age—as provocation to
dialogue with Facebook users. This is particularly important, since
internet memes, as noted by Milner, form part of the lingua franca of
twenty-first century. In Le Platte's case, his use of the visual
language of internet memes to evoke a shared and personal experience
among nationals is a clear example of this phenomenon. This further
supports Limor Shifman, Hadar Levy, and Mike Thelwall's argument
regarding the use of internet memes in the construction of nationalistic
discourses through visually based humor.[^47] Le Platte's work
demonstrates a quality of cohesiveness and quiddity evidenced through
appeals to language, identity, and cultural memory by references to
local sites and institutions, as is the case with figure 6, and to
vernacular, idioms, and ideas, as exemplified in figure 4. Nationals
confirm this with their favorable comments in response to his series of
online posts.

{% include image.html
  img="issue05/felix/fig4.png"
  title="What is my life?"
  caption="Figure 4. This meme features an image of sitcom character Carlton Banks (Alfonso Ribeiro) crying. Derived from the popular \"Carlton Crying\" meme series, this image is commonly used to express humor at disappointment. Source: Warren Le Platte (via Facebook)" %}

While disjointed in terms of the continuity of visual references, when
taken as a whole, the images in Le Platte's meme constellation
cohesively and emotively narrate his personal experience. However, the
disorderly nature of the visual references causes his work to possess a
character of quiddity that is accentuated by use of colloquial language.
Figure 4 features a popular character from the US television series *The
Fresh Prince of Bel-Air*. The irony of this particular image lies in the
fact that this sitcom character is generally always in positive spirits.
The tone of despondency presented in this component of the series is
used to express not only Le Platte's moviegoing failure but also his
lack of success in procuring local cuisine, doubling his frustration and
disappointment. The colloquial caption also directly refers to Le
Platte's reflection on his experience as he left the cinema.

Le Platte employed visual and textual means through his meme
constellation to communicate both meaning and information beyond basic
denotative dimensions of the images themselves. Additionally, Le Platte
reappropriated the images used in the creation of his internet meme
series: the connotative dimensions of these familiar images defied their
more common uses among internet users and across social networks. Many
of the images Le Platte used in the series were already in circulation,
and he pulled them from existing and already popular internet memes. In
essence, Le Platte made a series of memes from the materials of
existing-image macro internet memes—primarily using the *imagery*
featured in them as opposed to their *text-based content*. Also
important is that in the creation of his meme constellation Le Platte
did not employ the usual typeface, Impact, but instead used Myriad, a
typeface not typical to the image macro format. While the visual and
textual content in Le Platte's work references popular films,
celebrities, television series, local sites, and more, this typeface
detail causes Le Platte's work to depart from standard visual internet
meme image macro forms.

In addition, a *double use* of pastiche and bricolage can be observed
here: first, in the case of the construction of the original memes,
since images are removed from their original contexts; and second, in
how Le Platte reappropriates these images into his series as a
*templatable format* and *reproductive articulation*, based on Bradley
E. Wiggins and G. Bret Bowers's conceptualization of the internet meme
genres. Wiggins and Bowers note a distinction between what can be termed
as spreadable media, emergent memes, and memes (proper). In this
taxonomy, *spreadable media* refers to "untouched" digital artifacts (in
their original or base contexts) and the internet-based systems that
enable their networked diffusion and circulation through personal
sharing by members of an online community rather than through top-down
broadcast media; *emergent memes* refer to the initial instance of the
articulation of a digital artifact that may be reappropriated or altered
through pastiche or bricolage; finally, *memes*, in the proper sense of
the term/ concept in popular usage, refers to the ongoing templatable
format and reproductive articulation(s) spawned from the initial
first-instance emergent meme.[^48] Le Platte created a consistent
structure with each component of his meme constellation by juxtaposing
text and image to narrate a personal experience. The confluence of
cultural referencing and reappropriation in Le Platte's work presents a
rich tapestry of references, which then imparts an added layer of depth
to the series. Observing the numerous popular culture references in Le
Platte's work accords with Knobel and Lankshear position that
intertextuality functions as a cue for creative engagement particularly
in the case of internet memes because it fuels public discourse and the
collective narrative of digital spaces.[^49]

A fourth key element is that Le Platte's use of local parlance
necessarily intensified the series' resonance with Trinbagonian online
audiences. This point regarding language also corresponds with Shifman,
Levy, and Thelwall's comment on linguistic proximity bearing on the
circulation of internet memes and the contribution of Segev, Nissenbaum,
Stolero, and Shifman on how language categorizes internet memes based on
their textual characteristics, coherency, and singularity and their
relationship to other internet meme forms.[^50]

In an unusual fashion, Le Platte's meme constellation featured a
considerable degree of text-based communication in the construction of
his personal narrative. This is not the norm for internet memes, which
usually contain pithy written and visual content. It is also uncommon
for internet users to produce *individual* memes in a fashion that
allows for a coherent sequential narrative as an outcome. The measure of
visual and textual language employed by Le Platte, in addition to the
response by locals online, subverts Piia Varis and Jan Bloomaert's
notion of memes being a significant form of phatic communication, since
this line of reasoning negates the potential of internet memes to
deliver content beyond banal humor.[^51]

What can also be observed in this unusual instance is how Le Platte's
meme constellation supports Burgess's view of the memetic employed in
"digital storytelling" as a narrative form.[^52] Yet Le Platte's culture
jamming practice stands in stark contrast to this idea, since
authorship, an underexplored dimension of internet meme scholarship, is
a defining feature in this specific case. Le Platte's work is
illustrative of an atypical employment of alternative media in general
and internet memes in particular, since memes are content-driven
artifacts rather than author-driven or *auteur-like* devices, as in the
case of music, film, visual art, or other creative artifacts. Le
Platte's work defies this common characterization.

Le Platte's self-contained meme constellation combines clusters of
images from the broader scope of Western popular culture with very
specific references to Trinidad and Tobago, in terms of locality and
dialect. Le Platte used these elements to lament his negative experience
as a consumer of public entertainment and, by extension, to reflect
public discourse of institutional dysfunctionality or commess.

In a Michael Jackson meme (fig. 5), Le Platte uses these elements to
underscore his disappointment and disenfranchisement that were the
result of substandard service by what may have seemingly been considered
a respectable local franchise. He expresses initial optimism, despite
the ongoing challenges he has experienced, before ultimately becoming
resigned. The text, written in local dialect, roughly translates to,
"The movie started to play again; lots of action; I'm paying close
attention to the screen," conveying the sense of excitement and
enthusiasm Le Platte initially felt.

{% include image.html
  img="issue05/felix/fig5.png"
  title="So I dey like…"
  caption="Figure 5. A meme featuring famed pop music icon Michael Jackson. The caption expresses Le Platte's eagerness to watch a film at the cinema after initial technical difficulties. Source: Warren Le Platte (via Facebook)" %}

In another example, featuring an image of Michelle Obama, Le Platte
evokes a sense of cultural memory with a nostalgic reference to the now
defunct Globe Cinema outlet, situated in the heart of the nation's
capital (fig. 6). Having served local patrons for close to eighty years
since it first opened in 1933, the Globe Cinema is considered a
historical site and an important aspect of local heritage.[^53] However,
the popularity of the Globe Cinema was eclipsed by the rise of VCR
technologies in the 1980s, the introduction of cable television in the
1990s, and multiplex cinema chains in the early 2000s.[^54] At the time
of this writing, the Globe Cinema has been marginalized, used only
intermittently for local film screenings and other related creative
events, while the multiplex cinema chains—heralded by locals in Trinidad
and Tobago as "cultural" and technological advancement—have been the
dominant means of accessing Hollywood films.[^55]

{% include image.html
  img="issue05/felix/fig6.png"
  title="\#BringBackOurGlobeCinema"
  caption="Figure 6. Le Platte edited an image of Michelle Obama holding a sheet of paper to read a hashtag calling for the return of a well-known but now defunct local cinema (left). The original image is on the right. Warren Le Platte (via Facebook)" %}

Le Platte repurposed the popular image of the former US first lady and
her appeal \#BringBackOurGirls, referencing the highly publicized
kidnapping of two hundred Nigerian schoolgirls at the hands of the West
African Boko Haram terrorist group in 2014. This was another attempt by
Le Platte to demonstrate his sense of despondency regarding his current
plight at the local multiplex. Given his unpleasant customer service
experience at what might have been considered a professional and
somewhat reputable establishment, Le Platte's meme constellation
presents a critique of the local multiplex similar to an expression of
dispiritedness against Boko Haram. Moreover, there are two additional
points that underpin dimensions of Le Platte's critique: the
Americanized aesthetic of the Movie Towne multiplex franchise and the
theater's lack of general accessibility because of its location on the
outskirts of the capital.[^56] These points question perceived ideas
regarding the sense of inclusiveness and "cultural" advancement
multiplex cinemas were supposed to represent. The service offered by the
multiplex franchise had not proved to be, in Le Platte's opinion, more
favorable to that of the longstanding Globe Cinema in the heart of
Port-of-Spain. His use of the Obama image in figure 6 was a nostalgic
harkening to both history and heritage, especially given the place of
Globe Cinema in local cultural memory.[^57]

The "de-professionalized aesthetic" of internet memes is one of their
defining features.[^58] A fifth key element is that Le Platte's
background as a creative professional does not appear to have had much
bearing on the creation of his meme series. It also does not appear that
he employed any formal rules of art, graphic design, or "standard"
English in the creation of the meme constellation posted to Facebook. In
addition to the de-professionalization that is characteristic of
alternative media, the use of language in Le Platte's work is also the
byproduct of the local cultural context of the memes he generated.

Le Platte's cultural production of internet memes creates a unique
tension between his professional designation as a known local creative
industry practitioner and the "de-professionalized" output of his
creative efforts online. The circulation and currency of Le Platte's
creation of internet memes operates in keeping with Burgess and Green's
work on the flow of cultural production within the digital
landscape.[^59] In this respect, Le Platte's work is a prosumption-based
activity that invalidates the professional-amateur binary, outlined
earlier, since he produces and consumes knowledge in his contribution to
online public discourse through his culture jamming practice.

{% include image.html
  img="issue05/felix/fig7.png"
  title="Comments"
  caption="Figure 7. A screenshot of the comments section of Le Platte's meme constellation, featuring interactions by users. Source: Warren Le Platte (via Facebook)" %}

With this practice, Le Platte identifies with individuals across the
"professional versus amateur" continuum in authorship of his meme
series. Yet Le Platte's "power" as a creative professional does not
(centrally) characterize his creative effort in making internet memes. I
contend that his seemingly amateurish "practice of meming" invites
public engagement with this work through its relative accessibility,
given the popularity of the internet meme form. This is also in tandem
with the communication of his personal experience, since Le Platte draws
on the elements of language, identity, and cultural memory in an
intelligible fashion, stirring online public discourse as a result of
his efforts. As such, Le Platte's practice correlates with an
alternative media participatory model outlined by Jan Servaes and
Patchanee Malikhao, which emphasizes the necessity of public discourse
and an appropriate framework for this interaction; this model is
oppositional in that it provides institutional critique, with creative
and varied reception from participants who engage in discourse of this
nature. Le Platte's "practice(s) of meming" yield both viral and memetic
output, according to Limor Shifman's definition(s), yet Servaes and
Malikhao also present another important paradigm for understanding Le
Platte's creative practice as alternative media.[^60]

Le Platte's engagement via social media is a creative participatory
process that involves a particular structural arrangement in the
redistribution of power.[^61] Drawing from Atton's topology of
alternative media, I posit that the character of Le Platte's meme
constellation features a marked degree of hybridity in an artistic,
literary, and contextual sense.[^62] Le Platte evidences this hybridized
display by his creative expression vis-à-vis language, identity, and
cultural memory: using the image macro format, drawing from existing
meme and popular culture references, the use of local dialect to inform
the lexical dimension of his work and the dissemination of his internet
meme series across a public and participatory forum such as Facebook.
This last point is particularly noteworthy. Internet memes are found on
a range of online social networks such as Twitter, Instagram, and
YouTube; nevertheless, Facebook was selected by Le Platte as his prime
platform for dissemination. This observation is in keeping with
researchers who note Facebook as the preferred social media platform for
Trinidad and Tobago netizens.[^63] This preference relates to not only
the technical affordance of the platform itself but also the way it has
been used reflexively by locals, which is one of many ways the use of
Facebook can be represented.

Atton notes that alternative media provides discursive spaces for
counternarratives, providing unique access into the lived experiences of
others.[^64] Le Platte's internet meme constellation provides such
access into his own experience as a Trinidad and Tobago national and
member of the moviegoing public. Furthermore, Le Platte's role as a
*prosumer* situates him, via social media, as a proxy for other
prosumers—a result of the shared discourse that underpins his personal
narrative. As such, Le Platte's culture jamming further mobilizes the
participatory (and subversive) orientation of meme-making and online
public discourse. Conceptually, the alternative media framework
acknowledges the political act of self-publishing as a critical practice
that resists commodification, democratizes public involvement, and
allows for the creation of independent sites or "free spaces" for
counter-discourse and experimentation.[^65] Le Platte's internet meme
series manifests compatibility with this idea because his noncommercial
work invites public engagement and dissemination among Facebook users,
providing an institutional critique that reinscribes popular narratives
of dysfunctionality and commess.

The technological affordance of Facebook's "free space" facilitated Le
Platte's experimental image macro narrative and its counter-discursive
content. Like the double use of pastiche and bricolage mentioned
earlier, Le Platte's work presents an instance and example of "double
alternativity": the alternative practice of culture jamming or
practice(s) of meming is reappropriated into a new disruptive form that
functions as a participatory and subversive device. *Le Platte employs
alternative media in an alternative way*. However, in this case, Le
Platte's authorship appears to influence the cultural resonance of his
meme constellation in the communication of public discourse. Le Platte's
series is an atypical instance of double alternativity, in which,
through the practice of culture jamming, he produces an articulation of
alternative media that is further subverted, disrupted, and twice
removed from its initial context, resulting in a novel form that departs
from standard practices of counter-discursive action often seen in
internet memes.

Conclusion
----------

Warren Le Platte's singular meme constellation—a single collection of
memes having a unifying theme, structure, or object—presents a
noteworthy example of alternative media in Trinidad and Tobago; it
demonstrates how internet memes are vehicles for public discourse, given
this local context, while also bearing a unique character in relation to
common memetic forms. With a brand of humor based on Western popular
culture and local parlance, Le Platte's series draws on aspects of local
experience and practice, creating ongoing narratives of commess and
dysfunctionality that provide an ongoing critique of institutions and
governance. Stuart Hall notes two key ways of thinking about cultural
identity and, by extension, cultural memory: as shared history and
experience and as discontinuity and departure.[^66] These two aspects of
cultural identity and memory are but a few means of mobilizing public
discourse through internet memes in Trinidad and Tobago.[^67]

Le Platte's work represents ordinary citizens looking toward local
establishments to stay true to their commitments to the public. As such,
it connotes and suggests the experience of a large sector of Trinidad
and Tobago's population—a sector disillusioned by institutional
rhetoric. This idea of discontinuity also translates into the formal
aspects of Le Platte's meme constellation: reappropriated images
establishing new referential contexts and the composition of proposed
alternative narratives. Audiences, or prosumers, interpret these
contexts and narratives in a manner that they are able to identify with
and respond in ways that affirm the discourse(s) communicated through
his work. As such, while these image macros follow the formal
conventions of memes, the element of discontinuity is also present in
the way their form and content are articulated in the local context.

Trinbagonian digital culture is not only the result of mobile and
internet-based technology use. It is also a means of maintaining the
contours of local identity, considering increasing globalization and
especially the pervasive process of Americanization. Atton posits the
nature of alternative media through the participatory practice of
self-publishing, which offers opportunity for the construction of
self-identity.[^68] Le Platte engaged in a self-published narrative of
personal experience, which is linked to a broader sense of national
identity. The participatory nature of social media, coupled with the
discursive apparatus of the image macro enables locals such as Le Platte
to exercise their own agency through self-publishing and, following
Atton, provides avenues for "solidarity and the development of
reflexivity in the creative processes of democratic media
production."[^69] As such, the articulation of internet memes in the
case of Warren Le Platte confirms the construction of narratives of
dysfunctionality by presenting a reflexive critique through a
self-published narrative.

Le Platte's work not only uses humor but also comments on and ridicules
a particular establishment while also providing a light-hearted public
reflection on national life through language, identity, and cultural
memory. This reflection sees his work embrace of "commess culture" and
dysfunction as an integral part of local identity. It is with this
understanding of local identity that the proliferation and circulation
of internet memes makes sense in this context. While local internet
memes can and often do provide institutional critique, their social
function makes light of serious and incensing matters, providing
opportunity for cultural reflexivity or, in other words, a reflection on
public life and local identity. Forms of alternative media, such as the
culture jamming practiced by Le Platte, provide Trinidadians and
Tobagonians with a sociocultural mirror, offering them the ability to
see themselves, to participate in public discourse, and to exercise
their agency in contributing to local online discourse across the
digital public sphere.


---

Bibliography
------------

Ali, Shahad. "'Meanwhile in T&T' Discusses Internet Memes." *Trinidad
Guardian*, 17 September 2012.
<https://guardian.co.tt/article-6.2.430946.7a94c69891>.

Atton, Chris. *Alternative Media*. London: SAGE, 2001.

Atton, Chris. "A Brief History: The Web and Interactive Media." In
Coyer, Dowmunt, and Fountain, *Alternative Media Handbook*, 59–65.

Atton, Chris. "Infoshops in the Shadow of the State." In Couldry and
Curran, *Contesting Media Power: Alternative Media in a Networked
World*, 57–69.

Atton, Chris. "Introduction: Problems and Positions in Alternative and
Community Media." In Atton, *Routledge Companion to Alternative and
Community Media*, 1–18.

Atton, Chris, ed. *The Routledge Companion to Alternative and Community
Media*. Abingdon: Routledge, 2015.

Bagoo, Andre. "Owners Hope to Get \$25M for Property." *Trinidad and
Tobago Newsday*, 21 March 2013.
<https://archives.newsday.co.tt/2013/03/21/owners-hope-to-get-25m-for-property/>.

Bagoo, Andre. "Richards: Not Sure It's Legal." *Trinidad and Tobago
Newsday*, 24 October 2014.
<https://archives.newsday.co.tt/2014/10/24/richards-not-sure-its-legal/>.

Bailey, Olga Guedes, Bart Cammaerts, and Nico Carpentier. *Understanding
Alternative Media*. Maidenhead, UK: Open University Press, 2008.

Barclay, Francis P., C. Pichandy, and Anusha Venkat. "India Elections
2014: Time-Lagged Correlation between Media Bias and Facebook Trend."
*Global Journal of Human-Social Science* 15, no. 2 (2015): 29–41.

Benkler, Yochai. "Sharing Nicely: On Shareable Goods and the Emergence
of Sharing as a Modality of Economic Production." In Mandiberg, *Social
Media Reader*, 17–23. Originally published in *Yale Law Journal* 114,
no. 2 (2004): 273–358. <https://doi.org/10.2307/4135731>.

Best, Curwen. *The Politics of Caribbean Cyberculture*. New York:
Palgrave Macmillan, 2008. <https://doi.org/10.1057/9780230610132>.

"Board Game: Play Mas with 'Santimanitay,'" *Sweet TnT Magazine*,
February 2018. <https://sweettntmagazine.com/board-game-santimanitay/>.

Börzsei, Linda K. "Makes a Meme Instead: A Concise History of Internet
Memes." *New Media Studies Magazine* 7 (2013).
<http://works.bepress.com/linda_borzsei/2/>.

Brabham, Daren C. *Crowdsourcing*. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, 2013.

Brideau, Kate, and Charles Berret. "A Brief Introduction to Impact: 'The
Meme Font.'" *Journal of Visual Culture* 13, no. 3 (2014): 307–13.
<https://doi.org/10.1177/1470412914544515>.

Burgess, Jean. "Hearing Ordinary Voices: Cultural Studies, Vernacular
Creativity, and Digital Storytelling." *Continuum* 20, no. 2 (2006):
201–14. <https://doi.org/10.1080/10304310600641737>.

Burgess, Jean, and Joshua Green. *Youtube: Online Video and
Participatory Culture*. Oxford: Polity, 2009.

Campbell, Richard, Christopher R. Martin, and Bettina Fabos. *Media and
Culture: An Introduction to Mass Communication*. 8th ed. Boston:
Bedford/St. Marten's, 2012.

Chen, Carl. "The Creation and Meaning of Internet Memes in 4chan:
Popular Internet Culture in the Age of Online Digital Reproduction."
*Habitus*, no. 3 (Spring 2012): 6–19.

Comor, Edward. "Digital Prosumption and Alienation." *Ephemera* 10, nos.
3–4 (2010): 439–54.
<http://www.ephemerajournal.org/contribution/digital-prosumption-and-alienation>.

Couldry, Nick, and James Curran, eds. *Contesting Media Power:
Alternative Media in a Networked World*. Lanham, MD: Rowman and
Littlefield, 2003. <https://lccn.loc.gov/2003004221>.

Couldry, Nick, and James Curran. "The Paradox of Media Power." In
Couldry and Curran, *Contesting Media Power*, 3–16.

Coyer, Kate, Tony Dowmunt, and Alan Fountain, eds. *The Alternative
Media Handbook*. Abingdon: Routledge, 2011.

Davison, Patrick. "Because of the Pixels: On the History, Form, and
Influence of MS Paint." *Journal of Visual Culture* 13, no. 3 (2014):
275–97. <https://doi.org/10.1177/1470412914544539>.

Davison, Patrick. "The Language of Internet Memes." In Mandiberg,
*Social Media Reader*, 120–34.

Dixon, Bobie-Lee. "National Literary Festival Has Longer Run, More
Features." *Trinidad and Tobago Guardian*, 21 March 2016.
<http://www.guardian.co.tt/article-6.2.352140.f3d3155555>.

Douglas, Nick. "It's Supposed to Look like Shit: The Internet Ugly
Aesthetic." *Journal of Visual Culture* 13, no. 3 (2014): 314–39.
<https://doi.org/10.1177/1470412914544516>.

Fabian, Louise, and Camilla Møhring Reestorff. "Mediatization and the
Transformations of Cultural Activism." *Conjunctions* 2, no. 1 (2015):
1–20. <https://doi.org/10.7146/tjcp.v2i1.22267>.

Fenton, Natalie. "Mediating Hope: New Media, Politics, and Resistance."
*International Journal of Cultural Studies* 11, no. 2 (2008): 230–48.
<https://doi.org/10.1177/1367877908089266>.

Fiske, John. "The Cultural Economy of Fandom." In *The Adoring Audience:
Fan Culture and Popular Media*, edited by Lisa A. Lewis, 30–49. London:
Routledge, 1992.

Fiske, John. *Understanding Popular Culture*. London: Routledge, 1994.

Fraser, Mark. "Facelift for Globe as New Owner Takes Charge." *Trinidad
Express*, 1 September 2013.
<https://trinidadexpress.com/news/local/facelift-for-globe-as-new-owner-takes-charge/article_f4b0d5b1-1445-5f47-8a55-b2782c7f3194.html>.

Fuchs, Christian. "Alternative Media as Critical Media." *European
Journal of Social Theory* 13, no. 2 (2010): 173–92.
<https://doi.org/10.1177/1368431010362294>.

Fuchs, Christian. "Digital Prosumption Labour on Social Media in the
Context of the Capitalist Regime of Time." *Time and Society* 23, no. 1
(2014): 97–123. <https://doi.org/10.1177/0961463X13502117>.

Gehl, Robert W. "The Case for Alternative Social Media." *Social Media
and Society* 1, no. 2 (2015).
<https://doi.org/10.1177/2056305115604338>.

Gelder, Ken. *Subcultures: Cultural Histories and Social Practice*.
London: Routledge, 2007. <https://doi.org/10.4324/9780203446850>.

Guilbault, Jocelyne. "The Question of Multiculturalism in the Arts in
the Postcolonial Nation-State of Trinidad and Tobago." *Music and
Politics* 5, no. 1 (2011).
<https://doi.org/10.3998/mp.9460447.0005.101>.

Hall, Stuart. "Cultural Identity and Diaspora." In *Diaspora and Visual
Culture: Representing Africans and Jews*, edited by Nicholas Mirzoeff,
21–33. 2nd. ed. Abingdon: Routledge, 2014.

Jenkins, Henry. "The Cultural Logic of Media Convergence."
*International Journal of Cultural Studies* 7, no. 1 (2004): 33–43.
<https://doi.org/10.1177/1367877904040603>.

Jensen, Klaus Bruhn. "The Double Hermeneutics of Audience Research."
*Television and New Media* 20, no. 2 (2019): 142–54.
<https://doi.org/10.1177/1527476418811103>.

Kidd, Dorothy. "The Global Movement to Transform Communications." In
Coyer, Dowmunt, and Fountain, *Alternative Media Handbook*, 239–48.

Knobel, Michele, and Colin Lankshear. "Online Memes, Affinities, and
Cultural Production." In Knobel and Lankshear, *New Literacies Sampler*,
199–227.

Knobel, Michele, and Colin Lankshear, eds. *A New Literacies Sampler*.
New York: Peter Lang, 2007.

Lam, Sunny Sui-kwong. "Multi-layered Identities by Social Media and
Prosumption Practices in Digital and Participatory Communication."
*Journal of Digital Media and Interaction* 2, no. 3 (2019): 7–22.
<https://doi.org/10.34624/jdmi.v2i3.3747>.

Lidwell, William, Kritina Holden, and Jill Butler. *Universal Principles
of Design: 125 Ways to Enhance Usability, Influence Perception, Increase
Appeal, Make Beter Design Decisions, and Teach through Design*. Beverly,
MA: Rockport, 2010.

Lindo, Paula. "Board Games Trending Offline." *Trinidad and Tobago
Newsday*, 3 June 2020.
<https://newsday.co.tt/2020/06/03/board-games-trending-offline/>.

Lopes, Paul. "Culture and Stigma: Popular Culture and the Case of Comic
Books." *Sociological Forum* 21, no. 3 (2006): 387–414.
<https://link.springer.com/article/10.1007/s11206-006-9022-6>.

Mandiberg, Michael, ed. *The Social Media Reader*. New York: New York
University Press, 2012.

McAllister, Matthew P., Edward H. Sewell Jr., and Ian Gordon.
"Introducing Comics and Ideology." In *Comics and Ideology*, edited by
Matthew P. McAllister, Edward H. Sewell Jr., and Ian Gordon, 1–13. New
York: Peter Lang, 2001.
<http://www.peterlang.de/download/datasheet/46603/datasheet_69249.pdf>.

McFarlane-Alvarez, Susan Lillian. "Imaging and the National Imagining:
Theorizing Visual Sovereignty in Trinidad and Tobago Moving Image Media
through Analysis of Television Advertising." PhD dissertation, Georgia
State University, 2006.
<https://scholarworks.gsu.edu/communication_diss/3>.

Meikle, Graham. "Stop Signs: An Introduction to Culture Jamming." In
Coyer, Dowmunt, and Fountain, *Alternative Media Handbook*, 166–79.

Mendes-Franco, Janine. "Meme vs. Movie Theatre—Dawn of Consumer Justice
in Trinidad and Tobago?" *Global Voices*, 6 April 2016.
[https://globalvoices.org/2016/04/06/meme-vs-movie-theatre-dawn-of-consumer-justice-in-trinidad-tobago/\#](https://globalvoices.org/2016/04/06/meme-vs-movie-theatre-dawn-of-consumer-justice-in-trinidad-tobago/%23).

Miller, Daniel, and Jolynna Sinanan. *Visualising Facebook: A
Comparative Perspective*. London: UCL Press, 2017.
<https://doi.org/10.2307/j.ctt1mtz51h>.

Milner, Ryan M. "Hacking the Social: Internet Memes, Identity
Antagonism, and the Logic of Lulz." *Fibreculture Journal*, no. 22
(December 2013). FCJ-156.
<http://twentytwo.fibreculturejournal.org/fcj-156-hacking-the-social-internet-memes-identity-antagonism-and-the-logic-of-lulz/>.

Milner, Ryan M. "Pop Polyvocality: Internet Memes, Public Participation,
and the Occupy Wall Street Movement." *International Journal of
Communication* 7 (2013).
<https://ijoc.org/index.php/ijoc/article/view/1949>.

Milner, Ryan M. "The World Made Meme: Discourse and Identity in
Participatory Media." PhD dissertation, University of Kansas, 2012.
<https://kuscholarworks.ku.edu/handle/1808/10256>.

Milstein, Tema, and Alexis Pulos. "Culture Jam Pedagogy and Practice:
Relocating Culture by Staying on One's Toes." *Communication, Culture,
and Critique* 8, no. 3 (2015): 395–413.
<https://doi.org/10.1111/cccr.12090>.

Mowbray, Mike. "Alternative Logics? Parsing the Literature on
Alternative Media." In Atton, *Routledge Companion to Alternative and
Community Media*, 21–31.

O'Neill, Brian, J. Ignacio Gallego Pérez, and Frauke Zeller. "New
Perspectives on Audience Activity: 'Prosumption' and Media Activism as
Audience Practices." In *Audience Transformations: Shifting Audience
Positions in Late Modernity*, edited by Nico Carpentier, Kim Christian
Schrøder, and Lawrie Hallett, 157–71. New York: Routledge, 2013.
<https://doi.org/10.4324/9780203523162>.

Paltrinieri, Roberta, and Piergiorgio Esposti. "Processes of Inclusion
and Exclusion in the Sphere of Prosumerism." *Future Internet* 5, no. 1
(2013): 21–33. <https://doi.org/10.3390/fi5010021>.

Polách, Vladimír P. "Memes, Trojan Horses, and the Discursive Power of
Audience." *Human Affairs* 25, no. 2 (2015): 189–203.
<https://doi.org/10.1515/humaff-2015-0017>.

Rintel, Sean. "Crisis Memes: The Importance of Templatability to
Internet Culture and Freedom of Expression." *Australasian Journal of
Popular Culture* 2, no. 2 (2013): 253–71.
<https://doi.org/10.1386/ajpc.2.2.253_1>.

Rosen, Jay. "The People Formerly Known as the Audience." In Mandiberg,
*Social Media Reader*, 13–16.

Rutter, Richard, Stuart Roper, and Fiona Lettice. "Social Media
Interaction, the University Brand and Recruitment Performance." *Journal
of Business Research* 69, no. 8 (2016): 3096–104.
<https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jbusres.2016.01.025>.

Segev, Elad, Asaf Nissenbaum, Nathan Stolero, and Limor Shifman.
"Families and Networks of Internet Memes: The Relationship Between
Cohesiveness, Uniqueness, and Quiddity Concreteness." *Journal of
Computer-Mediated Communication* 20, no. 4 (2015): 417–33.
<https://doi.org/10.1111/jcc4.12120>.

Servaes, Jan, and Patchanee Malikhao. "Participatory Communication: The
New Paradigm." In *Media and Glocal Change: Rethinking Communication for
Development*, edited by Oscar Hemer and Thomas Tufte, 91–103. Buenos
Aires: CLASCO, 2005.
<http://bibliotecavirtual.clacso.org.ar/clacso/coediciones/20100824064944/09Chapter5.pdf>.

Shifman, Limor. "An Anatomy of a Youtube Meme." *New Media and Society*
14, no. 2 (2012): 187–203. <https://doi.org/10.1177/1461444811412160>.

Shifman, Limor. "The Cultural Logic of Photo-Based Meme Genres."
*Journal of Visual Culture* 13, no. 3 (2014): 340–58.
<https://doi.org/10.1177/1470412914546577>.

Shifman, Limor. "Humor in the Age of Digital Reproduction: Continuity
and Change in Internet-Based Comic Texts." *International Journal of
Communication* 1 (2007): 187–209.
<https://ijoc.org/index.php/ijoc/article/view/11>.

Shifman, Limor. "Memes in a Digital World: Reconciling with a Conceptual
Troublemaker." *Journal of Computer-Mediated Communication* 18, no. 3
(2013): 362–77. <https://doi.org/10.1111/jcc4.12013>.

Shifman, Limor, Hadar Levy, and Mike Thelwall. "Internet Jokes: The
Secret Agents of Globalization?" *Journal of Computer-Mediated
Communication* 19, no. 4 (2014): 727–43.
<https://doi.org/10.1111/jcc4.12082>.

Sinanan, Jolynna. *Social Media in Trinidad: Values and Visibility*.
London: UCL Press, 2017.

Tumolo, Maria. "An Interview with Warren Le Platte: Creator of the Board
Game 'Santimanitay.'" *The Tiger Tales* (blog), 14 January 2018.
<https://thetigertales.co.uk/interview-warren-le-platte-creator-board-game-santimanitay/>.

Varis, Piia, and Jan Blommaert. "Conviviality and Collectives on Social
Media: Virality, Memes, and New Social Structures." *Multilingual
Margins* 2, no. 1 (2015): 31–45. <https://doi.org/10.14426/mm.v2i1.55>.

Wiggins, Bradley E., and G. Bret Bowers. "Memes as Genre: A
Structurational Analysis of the Memescape." *New Media and Society* 17,
no. 11 (2015): 1886–1906. <https://doi.org/10.1177/1461444814535194>.

Wilson, Mark. "The Cinema Glory Days Are Coming Back." *Caribbean Beat*,
March–April 2002.
[https://www.caribbean-beat.com/issue-54/glory-days-coming-back\#axzz6KH65Kv4z](https://www.caribbean-beat.com/issue-54/glory-days-coming-back%23axzz6KH65Kv4z).

Zajc, Melita. "Social Media, Prosumption, and Dispositives: New
Mechanisms of the Construction of Subjectivity." *Journal of Consumer
Culture* 15, no. 1 (2015): 28–47.
<https://doi.org/10.1177/1469540513493201>.

---

Notes

[^1]: See Olga Guedes Bailey, Bart Cammaerts, and Nico Carpentier,
    *Understanding Alternative Media* (Maidenhead, UK: Open University
    Press, 2008); Ken Gelder, *Subcultures: Cultural Histories and
    Social Practice* (London: Routledge, 2007),
    <https://doi.org/10.4324/9780203446850>; and Dorothy Kidd, "The
    Global Movement to Transform Communications," in *The Alternative
    Media Handbook*, ed. Kate Coyer, Tony Dowmunt, and Alan Fountain
    (Abingdon: Routledge, 2011), 239–48.

[^2]: See Daniel Miller and Jolynna Sinanan, *Visualising Facebook: A
    Comparative Perspective* (London: UCL Press, 2017),
    <https://doi.org/10.2307/j.ctt1mtz51h>; and Jolynna Sinanan, *Social
    Media in Trinidad: Values and Visibility* (London: UCL Press, 2017).

[^3]: See Chris Atton, *Alternative Media* (London: SAGE, 2001).

[^4]: See ibid.; and Chris Atton, "Introduction: Problems and Positions
    in Alternative and Community Media," in *The Routledge Companion to
    Alternative and Community Media*, ed. Chris Atton (Abingdon:
    Routledge, 2015), 1–18.

[^5]: See Atton, *Alternative Media*; and Atton, "Introduction."

[^6]: Atton, "Introduction," 1.

[^7]: In Coyer, Dowmunt, and Fountain, *Alternative Media Handbook*, see
    Tony Dowmunt, with Kate Coyer, introduction, 3–4; and the
    introduction to chap. 10, 163–64.

[^8]: The Situationists was a small Paris-based collective of
    intellectuals who engaged in artistic interventions as a means of
    critiquing the idea of modernity within Western societies. See
    Louise Fabian and Camilla Møhring Reestorff, "Mediatization and the
    Transformations of Cultural Activism," *Conjunctions* 2, no. 1
    (2015): 1–20, <https://doi.org/10.7146/tjcp.v2i1.22267>; Tema
    Milstein and Alexis Pulos, "Culture Jam Pedagogy and Practice:
    Relocating Culture by Staying on One's Toes," *Communication,
    Culture, and Critique* 8, no. 3 (2015): 396–97,
    <https://doi.org/10.1111/cccr.12090>; and Mike Mowbray, "Alternative
    Logics? Parsing the Literature on Alternative Media," in Atton,
    *Routledge Companion to Alternative and Community Media*, 21, 28–29.

[^9]: Coyer, Dowmunt, and Fountain, *Alternative Media Handbook*;
    Bailey, Cammaerts, and Carpentier, *Understanding Alternative
    Media*; Nick Couldry and James Curran, "The Paradox of Media Power,"
    in *Contesting Media Power: Alternative Media in a Networked World*,
    ed. Nick Couldry and James Curran (Lanham, MD: Rowman and
    Littlefield, 2003), 6–7.

[^10]: See, for example, Carl Chen, "The Creation and Meaning of
    Internet Memes in 4chan: Popular Internet Culture in the Age of
    Online Digital Reproduction," *Habitus*, no. 3 (Spring 2012): 6–19;
    Coyer, Dowmunt, and Fountain, *Alternative Media Handbook*; Graham
    Meikle, "Stop Signs: An Introduction to Culture Jamming," in Coyer,
    Dowmunt, and Fountain, *Alternative Media Handbook*, 166; Vladimír
    P. Polách, "Memes, Trojan Horses, and the Discursive Power of
    Audience," *Human Affairs* 25, no. 2 (2015): 194, 202,
    <https://doi.org/10.1515/humaff-2015-0017>; Bradley E. Wiggins and
    G. Bret Bowers, "Memes as Genre: A Structurational Analysis of the
    Memescape," *New Media and Society* 17, no. 11 (2015): 1898–1900,
    <https://doi.org/10.1177/1461444814535194>.

[^11]: Patrick Davison, "The Language of Internet Memes," in *The Social
    Media Reader*, ed. Michael Mandiberg (New York: New York University
    Press, 2012), 122–23.

[^12]: See Nick Douglas, "It's Supposed to Look like Shit: The Internet
    Ugly Aesthetic," *Journal of Visual Culture* 13, no. 3 (2014):
    314–39, <https://doi.org/10.1177/1470412914544516>.

[^13]: See Natalie Fenton, "Mediating Hope: New Media, Politics, and
    Resistance," *International Journal of Cultural Studies* 11, no. 2
    (2008): 230–48, <https://doi.org/10.1177/1367877908089266>.

[^14]: See Atton, *Alternative Media*; Christian Fuchs, "Alternative
    Media as Critical Media," *European Journal of Social Theory* 13,
    no. 2 (2010): 173–92, <https://doi.org/10.1177/1368431010362294>;
    and Ryan M. Milner, "Hacking the Social: Internet Memes, Identity
    Antagonism, and the Logic of Lulz," *Fibreculture Journal*, no. 22
    (December 2013), FCJ-156,
    <http://twentytwo.fibreculturejournal.org/fcj-156-hacking-the-social-internet-memes-identity-antagonism-and-the-logic-of-lulz/>.

[^15]: An image macro is a digital image that has a word or caption
    superimposed on it to generate a typically humorous meaning. It is
    the most common form of internet meme. See Andre Bagoo, "Richards:
    Not Sure It's Legal," *Trinidad and Tobago Newsday*, 24 October
    2014,
    <https://archives.newsday.co.tt/2014/10/24/richards-not-sure-its-legal/>;
    Janine Mendes-Franco, "Meme vs. Movie Theatre—Dawn of Consumer
    Justice in Trinidad and Tobago?," *Global Voices*, 6 April 2016,
    [https://globalvoices.org/2016/04/06/meme-vs-movie-theatre-dawn-of-consumer-justice-in-trinidad-tobago/\#](https://globalvoices.org/2016/04/06/meme-vs-movie-theatre-dawn-of-consumer-justice-in-trinidad-tobago/%23);
    and Chen, "Creation and Meaning of Internet Memes in 4chan."

[^16]: See Sean Rintel, "Crisis Memes: The Importance of Templatability
    to Internet Culture and Freedom of Expression," *Australasian
    Journal of Popular Culture* 2, no. 2 (2013): 253–71,
    <https://doi.org/10.1386/ajpc.2.2.253_1>; and Kate Brideau and
    Charles Berret, "A Brief Introduction to Impact: 'The Meme Font,'"
    *Journal of Visual Culture* 13, no. 3 (2014): 307–13,
    <https://doi.org/10.1177/1470412914544515>.

[^17]: See Michele Knobel and Colin Lankshear, eds., *A New Literacies
    Sampler* (New York: Peter Lang, 2007).

[^18]: See Patrick Davison, "Because of the Pixels: On the History,
    Form, and Influence of MS Paint," *Journal of Visual Culture* 13,
    no. 3 (2014): 275–97, <https://doi.org/10.1177/1470412914544539>;
    and Davison, "Language of Internet Memes."

[^19]: See Ryan M. Milner, "Pop Polyvocality: Internet Memes, Public
    Participation, and the Occupy Wall Street Movement," *International
    Journal of Communication* 7 (2013),
    <https://ijoc.org/index.php/ijoc/article/view/1949>. See also Ryan
    M. Milner, "The World Made Meme: Discourse and Identity in
    Participatory Media" (PhD diss., University of Kansas, 2012),
    <https://kuscholarworks.ku.edu/handle/1808/10256>; and Jean Burgess,
    "Hearing Ordinary Voices: Cultural Studies, Vernacular Creativity,
    and Digital Storytelling," *Continuum* 20, no. 2 (2006): 201–14,
    <https://doi.org/10.1080/10304310600641737>.

[^20]: See Atton, *Alternative Media*; and Davison, "Language of
    Internet Memes," 130–32.

[^21]: William Lidwell, Kritina Holden, and Jill Butler, *Universal
    Principles of Design: 125 Ways to Enhance Usability, Influence
    Perception, Increase Appeal, Make Beter Design Decisions, and Teach
    through Design* (Beverly, MA: Rockport, 2010), 20.

[^22]: See Chris Atton, "A Brief History: The Web and Interactive
    Media," in Coyer, Dowmunt, and Fountain, *Alternative Media
    Handbook*, 59–65; and Edward Comor, "Digital Prosumption and
    Alienation," *Ephemera* 10, nos. 3–4 (2010): 439–54,
    <http://www.ephemerajournal.org/contribution/digital-prosumption-and-alienation>.

[^23]: See Brian O'Neill, J. Ignacio Gallego Pérez, and Frauke Zeller,
    "New Perspectives on Audience Activity: 'Prosumption' and Media
    Activism as Audience Practices," in *Audience Transformations:
    Shifting Audience Positions in Late Modernity*, ed. Nico Carpentier,
    Kim Christian Schrøder, and Lawrie Hallett (New York: Routledge,
    2013), 157–71, <https://doi.org/10.4324/9780203523162>; Roberta
    Paltrinieri and Piergiorgio Esposti, "Processes of Inclusion and
    Exclusion in the Sphere of Prosumerism," *Future Internet* 5, no. 1
    (2013): 21–33, <https://doi.org/10.3390/fi5010021>; Melita Zajc,
    "Social Media, Prosumption, and Dispositives: New Mechanisms of the
    Construction of Subjectivity," *Journal of Consumer Culture* 15, no.
    1 (2015): 43–44, <https://doi.org/10.1177/1469540513493201>; and
    Yochai Benkler, "Sharing Nicely: On Shareable Goods and the
    Emergence of Sharing as a Modality of Economic Production," in
    Mandiberg, *Social Media Reader*, 17–23 (originally published in
    *Yale Law Journal* 114, no. 2 2004: 273–358,
    <https://doi.org/10.2307/4135731>).

[^24]: Zajc, "Social Media, Prosumption, and Dispositives," 44.

[^25]: See Atton, *Alternative Media*; and Mowbray, "Alternative
    Logics?," 23–25.

[^26]: See Davison, "Language of Internet Memes." See also Douglas,
    "It's Supposed to Look like Shit."

[^27]: See, for example, Christian Fuchs, "Digital Prosumption Labour on
    Social Media in the Context of the Capitalist Regime of Time," *Time
    and Society* 23, no. 1 (2014): 97–123,
    <https://doi.org/10.1177/0961463X13502117>; O'Neill, Gallego Pérez,
    and Zeller, "New Perspectives on Audience Activity"; Jay Rosen, "The
    People Formerly Known as the Audience," in Mandiberg, *Social Media
    Reader*, 13–16; Daren C. Brabham, *Crowdsourcing* (Cambridge, MA:
    MIT Press, 2013); and Benkler, "Sharing Nicely."

[^28]: Crowdsourcing is an organizational labor model that uses
    internet-based platforms to engage in collective problem-solving
    through individual and collaborative work for achieving clearly
    defined ends. See Brabham, *Crowdsourcing*; and Linda K. Börzsei,
    "Makes a Meme Instead: A Concise History of Internet Memes," *New
    Media Studies Magazine*, no. 7 (2013),
    <http://works.bepress.com/linda_borzsei/2/>.

[^29]: See Jean Burgess and Joshua Green, *Youtube: Online Video and
    Participatory Culture* (Oxford: Polity, 2009).

[^30]: See Francis P. Barclay, C. Pichandy, and Anusha Venkat, "India
    Elections 2014: Time-Lagged Correlation between Media Bias and
    Facebook Trend," *Global Journal of Human-Social Science* 15, no. 2
    (2015): 29–41; and Atton, *Alternative Media*.

[^31]: See Burgess and Green, *Youtube*; see also Barclay, Pichandy, and
    Venkat, "India Elections 2014."

[^32]: See Burgess and Green, *Youtube*; and Burgess, "Hearing Ordinary
    Voices."

[^33]: See Richard Rutter, Stuart Roper, and Fiona Lettice, "Social
    Media Interaction, the University Brand and Recruitment
    Performance," *Journal of Business Research* 69, no. 8 (2016):
    3096–104, <https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jbusres.2016.01.025>; and
    Richard Campbell, Christopher R. Martin, and Bettina Fabos, *Media
    and Culture: An Introduction to Mass Communication*, 8th ed.
    (Boston: Bedford/St. Marten's, 2012).

[^34]: On media convergence, see Henry Jenkins, "The Cultural Logic of
    Media Convergence," *International Journal of Cultural Studies* 7,
    no. 1 (2004): 33–43, <https://doi.org/10.1177/1367877904040603>;
    Klaus Bruhn Jensen, "The Double Hermeneutics of Audience Research,"
    *Television and New Media* 20, no. 2 (2019): 142–54,
    <https://doi.org/10.1177/1527476418811103>; and Sinanan, *Social
    Media in Trinidad*.

[^35]: See Miller and Sinanan, *Visualising Facebook*.

[^36]: Shahad Ali, "'Meanwhile in T&T' Discusses Internet Memes,"
    *Trinidad Guardian*, 17 September 2012,
    <https://guardian.co.tt/article-6.2.430946.7a94c69891>.

[^37]: See Miller and Sinanan, *Visualising Facebook*; and Sinanan,
    *Social Media in Trinidad*.

[^38]: Michele Knobel and Colin Lankshear, "Online Memes, Affinities,
    and Cultural Production," in Knobel and Lankshear, *New Literacies
    Sampler*, 225.

[^39]: See "Shades of a Crayon—Warren Le Platte: Graphic Designer,
    Photographer, Illustrator, Cartoonist, Writer," A BigBox of Crayons,
    2015,
    <https://www.abigboxofcrayons.com/blog/20-shades-of-a-crayon-warren-le-platte>;
    "Warren Le Platte: Graphic Designer, Illustrator, Photographer,"
    Bocas Lit Fest, 2019,
    <https://www.bocaslitfest.com/author/warren-le-platte/>; and Le
    Platte Studios, <https://leplattestudios.com>.

[^40]: See "Board Game: Play Mas with 'Santimanitay,'" *Sweet TnT
    Magazine*, February 2018,
    <https://sweettntmagazine.com/board-game-santimanitay/>; Maria
    Tumolo, "An Interview with Warren Le Platte: Creator of the Board
    Game 'Santimanitay,'" *The Tiger Tales* (blog), 14 January 2018,
    <https://thetigertales.co.uk/interview-warren-le-platte-creator-board-game-santimanitay/>;
    and Paula Lindo, "Board Games Trending Offline," *Trinidad and
    Tobago Newsday*, 3 June 2020,
    <https://newsday.co.tt/2020/06/03/board-games-trending-offline/>.

[^41]: See Mendes-Franco, "Meme vs. Movie Theatre."

[^42]: See Matthew P. McAllister, Edward H. Sewell Jr., and Ian Gordon,
    "Introducing Comics and Ideology," in *Comics and Ideology*, ed.
    Matthew P. McAllister, Edward H. Sewell Jr., and Ian Gordon (New
    York: Peter Lang, 2001), 1–13,
    <http://www.peterlang.de/download/datasheet/46603/datasheet_69249.pdf>;
    and John Fiske, "The Cultural Economy of Fandom," in *The Adoring
    Audience: Fan Culture and Popular Media*, ed. Lisa A. Lewis (London:
    Routledge, 1992), 30–49.

[^43]: See John Fiske, *Understanding Popular Culture* (London:
    Routledge, 1994).

[^44]: *Konmès* or *commess* is a Caribbean-based term referring to the
    creation of extreme confusion, scandal, and disorder. See
    *Dictionary of Caribbean English Usage*, ed. Richard Allsopp (1996;
    repr., Kingston: University of the West Indies Press, 2003), s.v.
    "konmès."

[^45]: See Elad Segev, Asaf Nissenbaum, Nathan Stolero, and Limor
    Shifman, "Families and Networks of Internet Memes: The Relationship
    Between Cohesiveness, Uniqueness, and Quiddity Concreteness,"
    *Journal of Computer-Mediated Communication* 20, no. 4 (2015):
    417–33, <https://doi.org/10.1111/jcc4.12120>.

[^46]: See Curwen Best, *The Politics of Caribbean Cyberculture* (New
    York: Palgrave Macmillan, 2008),
    <https://doi.org/10.1057/9780230610132>.

[^47]: See Limor Shifman, Hadar Levy, and Mike Thelwall, "Internet
    Jokes: The Secret Agents of Globalization?," *Journal of
    Computer-Mediated Communication* 19, no. 4 (2014): 727–43,
    <https://doi.org/10.1111/jcc4.12082>. See also Limor Shifman, "Memes
    in a Digital World: Reconciling with a Conceptual Troublemaker,"
    *Journal of Computer-Mediated Communication* 18, no. 3 (2013):
    362–77, <https://doi.org/10.1111/jcc4.12013>.

[^48]: See Wiggins and Bowers, "Memes as Genre."

[^49]: See Knobel and Lankshear, *New Literacies Sampler*. See also Paul
    Lopes, "Culture and Stigma: Popular Culture and the Case of Comic
    Books," *Sociological Forum* 21, no. 3 (2006): 387–414,
    <https://link.springer.com/article/10.1007/s11206-006-9022-6>.

[^50]: See Shifman, Levy, and Thelwall, "Internet Jokes"; and Segev,
    Nissenbaum, Stolero, and Shifman, "Families and Networks of Internet
    Memes."

[^51]: See Piia Varis and Jan Blommaert, "Conviviality and Collectives
    on Social Media: Virality, Memes, and New Social Structures,"
    *Multilingual Margins* 2, no. 1 (2015): 31–45,
    <https://doi.org/10.14426/mm.v2i1.55>.

[^52]: See Burgess, "Hearing Ordinary Voices"; and Burgess and Green,
    *Youtube*.

[^53]: See Andre Bagoo, "Owners Hope to Get \$25M for Property,"
    *Trinidad and Tobago Newsday*, 21 March 2013,
    <https://archives.newsday.co.tt/2013/03/21/owners-hope-to-get-25m-for-property/>;
    and Mark Wilson, "The Cinema Glory Days Are Coming Back," *Caribbean
    Beat*, March–April 2002,
    [https://www.caribbean-beat.com/issue-54/glory-days-coming-back\#axzz6KH65Kv4z](https://www.caribbean-beat.com/issue-54/glory-days-coming-back%23axzz6KH65Kv4z).

[^54]: See Jocelyne Guilbault, "The Question of Multiculturalism in the
    Arts in the Postcolonial Nation-State of Trinidad and Tobago,"
    *Music and Politics* 5, no. 1 (2011),
    <https://doi.org/10.3998/mp.9460447.0005.101>; and Wilson, "Cinema
    Glory Days."

[^55]: See Bobie-Lee Dixon, "National Literary Festival Has Longer Run,
    More Features," *Trinidad and Tobago Guardian*, 21 March 2016,
    <http://www.guardian.co.tt/article-6.2.352140.f3d3155555>; and Mark
    Fraser, "Facelift for Globe as New Owner Takes Charge," *Trinidad
    Express*, 1 September 2013,
    <https://trinidadexpress.com/news/local/facelift-for-globe-as-new-owner-takes-charge/article_f4b0d5b1-1445-5f47-8a55-b2782c7f3194.html>.
    See also Wilson, "Cinema Glory Days."

[^56]: See Susan Lillian McFarlane-Alvarez, "Imaging and the National
    Imagining: Theorizing Visual Sovereignty in Trinidad and Tobago
    Moving Image Media through Analysis of Television Advertising" (PhD
    diss., Georgia State University, 2006),
    <https://scholarworks.gsu.edu/communication_diss/3>.

[^57]: See also Wilson, "Cinema Glory Days."

[^58]: See Börzsei, "Makes a Meme Instead."

[^59]: See Burgess and Green, *Youtube*.

[^60]: See Jan Servaes and Patchanee Malikhao, "Participatory
    Communication: The New Paradigm," in *Media and Glocal Change:
    Rethinking Communication for Development*, ed. Oscar Hemer and
    Thomas Tufte (Buenos Aires: CLASCO, 2005), 91–103,
    <http://bibliotecavirtual.clacso.org.ar/clacso/coediciones/20100824064944/09Chapter5.pdf>.
    On practices of meming, see Lopes, "Culture and Stigma." See also
    Limor Shifman, "Humor in the Age of Digital Reproduction: Continuity
    and Change in Internet-Based Comic Texts," *International Journal of
    Communication* 1 (2007): 187­–209,
    <https://ijoc.org/index.php/ijoc/article/view/11>; Shifman, "Memes
    in a Digital World"; Limor Shifman, "The Cultural Logic of
    Photo-Based Meme Genres," *Journal of Visual Culture* 13, no. 3
    (2014): 340–58, <https://doi.org/10.1177/1470412914546577>; Limor
    Shifman, "An Anatomy of a Youtube Meme," *New Media and Society* 14,
    no. 2 (2012): 187–203, <https://doi.org/10.1177/1461444811412160>;
    Segev, Nissenbaum, Stolero, and Shifman, "Families and Networks of
    Internet Memes"; and Shifman, Levy, and Thelwall, "Internet Jokes."

[^61]: In addition to Servaes and Malikhao, "Participatory
    Communication," see Fabian and Reestorff, "Mediatization and the
    Transformations of Cultural Activism"; and Sunny Sui-kwong Lam,
    "Multi-layered Identities by Social Media and Prosumption Practices
    in Digital and Participatory Communication," *Journal of Digital
    Media and Interaction* 2, no. 3 (2019): 7–22,
    <https://doi.org/10.34624/jdmi.v2i3.3747>.

[^62]: See Atton, *Alternative Media*.

[^63]: See Miller and Sinanan, *Visualising Facebook*; and Sinanan,
    *Social Media in Trinidad*.

[^64]: See Atton, *Alternative Media*; and Atton, "Introduction."

[^65]: See Atton, *Alternative Media*; and Robert W. Gehl, "The Case for
    Alternative Social Media," *Social Media and Society* 1, no. 2
    (2015), <https://doi.org/10.1177/2056305115604338>.

[^66]: See Stuart Hall, "Cultural Identity and Diaspora," in *Diaspora
    and Visual Culture: Representing Africans and Jews*, ed. Nicholas
    Mirzoeff, 2nd. ed. (Abingdon: Routledge, 2014), 21–33.

[^67]: See Ali, "'Meanwhile in T&T' Discusses Internet Memes"; Miller
    and Sinanan, *Visualising Facebook*; and Sinanan, *Social Media in
    Trinidad*.

[^68]: See Atton, "Introduction."

[^69]: []{#_Hlk51252827 .anchor}Chris Atton, "Infoshops in the Shadow of
    the State," in Couldry and Curran, *Contesting Media Power*, 59.
