---
layout: article
section: articles
title: 
  "long": "Unmapping the Caribbean: Toward a Digital Praxis of Archipelagic Sounding"
  "short": "Unmapping the Caribbean"
doi: "https://doi.org/#"
author: 
- name: Tao Leigh Goffe
  shortname: Goffe
  bio: >
    Tao Leigh Goffe is an assistant professor of literary theory and cultural history at Cornell University. She is also a sound artist, specializing in the narratives that emerge from histories of imperialism, migration, and globalization. Her interdisciplinary research and practice examine the unfolding relationship between ecology, infrastructure, and the sensorium. Deejaying, film production, digital cartography, and oral history are also integral to her praxis and pedagogy. She is the cofounder of the [Dark Laboratory](https://www.darklaboratory.com/) (see https://www.darklaboratory.com/), a humanities collective of theorist and creative technologists that examines black and indigenous crossroads in ecology and technology.
date: December 2020
issue: 5
order: 3
abstract: >
  Tackling the conceptual grounds of how maps have been deployed as tools of imperial capitalist extraction, this essay critiques how the two-dimensional visualization of land has traditionally flattened the racial entanglement of the Caribbean archipelago. It explores the potential for born-digital cartography to open up a new sensory possibility for understanding space amplified by sonic and video technologies. The author embarked on the digital project *Unmapping the Caribbean* with her students and a team of technologists, employing Esri’s ArcGIS Story Maps platform to examine the contours of *marronage* and indigeneity in five geographies: New York City, Suriname, Hispaniola, Cuba, and Jamaica. The project anchors the relationality of sedimented racial histories in the archipelago through the concept of “unmapping”—that is, by creating digital audiovisual story maps of the five Caribbean spaces. Centering the way sound orients the human body in space, the project examines the politics of the opacity of spaces of black and indigenous refuge in Caribbean and Caribbean diasporic communities. The essay considers the pedagogical stakes of collaborative digital assignments that include mapmaking and producing visual soundtracks. The five geographic narratives that *Unmapping the Caribbean* has woven together are part of an ongoing project that aims to articulate archipelagic being. 
abstract_fr: >
  Tackling the conceptual grounds of how maps have been deployed as tools of imperial capitalist extraction, this essay critiques how the two-dimensional visualization of land has traditionally flattened the racial entanglement of the Caribbean archipelago. It explores the potential for born-digital cartography to open up a new sensory possibility for understanding space amplified by sonic and video technologies. The author embarked on the digital project *Unmapping the Caribbean* with her students and a team of technologists, employing Esri’s ArcGIS Story Maps platform to examine the contours of *marronage* and indigeneity in five geographies: New York City, Suriname, Hispaniola, Cuba, and Jamaica. The project anchors the relationality of sedimented racial histories in the archipelago through the concept of “unmapping”—that is, by creating digital audiovisual story maps of the five Caribbean spaces. Centering the way sound orients the human body in space, the project examines the politics of the opacity of spaces of black and indigenous refuge in Caribbean and Caribbean diasporic communities. The essay considers the pedagogical stakes of collaborative digital assignments that include mapmaking and producing visual soundtracks. The five geographic narratives that *Unmapping the Caribbean* has woven together are part of an ongoing project that aims to articulate archipelagic being.  
abstract_es: >
  New media technologies—from the tape recorder to the computer—enabled Kamau Brathwaite’s revolutionary poetic approach; digital technologies likewise enable us to study and teach his groundbreaking work in new ways. This essay argues that teaching and studying Brathwaite should begin with the audible word not the written text and that digital audio archives and platforms can play a key role in enabling this approach. Digital audio archives such as PennSound and the Poetry Archive allow students and scholars to approach Brathwaite’s work by listening closely to a wide range of sound recordings. This essay demonstrates the utility of this close listening approach by taking advantage of the digital platform of *archipelagos journal* to interweave its text with Brathwaite’s recorded voice. It not only demonstrates the value of approaching Brathwaite’s work through digital sound recordings but also argues for a larger overturning of critical, pedagogical, and essayistic conventions in literary studies through a methodological turn away from the page.
language: en
pdf: true
---



> You will find a way.
>
> — Jamaican police officer on motorbike giving directions in Mandeville,
> 2014

The literary and sonic traditions of the archipelago are equally
critical to Caribbean study. The musical soundtrack of island life is
inseparable from studying the radical political tradition of the region,
and I center this approach in a course I have been teaching since 2015
titled Caribbean Writing, Reggae, and Routes. Vernacular oral traditions
trace the roots and routes of the Caribbean and its diaspora to Africa,
Asia, and Europe. Each year that I teach the course, music and the
sounds of natural and built environments become more essential to the
argument of Caribbean critical theory and much more than an
accompaniment to novels and poetry featured on the syllabus. In the
course, which is both born-digital and born-musical, students annotated
literature and songs using online platforms in the first iteration in
2015.[^1] The course has become more digitally and musically engaged as
I have encouraged students to produce their own soundtracks, embedding
them in maps in a practice I call “sonic mapping.” This multisensorial
method of reading the Caribbean archipelago attunes a spatial awareness.
Sonic analysis requires attention to the spatial because sound is quite
literally how our ears perceive the vibrations that bounce off our
environment. As such, my sonic praxis has become amplified by digital
geographic technologies.

As a professor and a DJ, a “PhDJ,” I see the role of an educator as one
intimately tied to that of a DJ. The
[syllabus](https://caribbeanliterature.princeton.edu/) is a mixtape—I
narrate the progression of texts on a syllabus, almost toasting, to
introduce and string together a line of thought about Caribbean artistic
and political expression.[^2] Reggae songs are integral, and each week I
ask students to choose a song connected to the readings on the syllabus
to form a collective weekly playlist, housed on our course blog.
Students are required to write a few sentences explaining the reasoning
for their choice, be it thematic or affective.

Recognizing the limitations of close reading, in how it assumes a text
has an inherent transparency, we instead perform a practice of deep
listening. This involves a multisensorial receptivity through the
practice of what Audre Lorde calls “deep participation.”[^3] It also
involves the receptivity that Julian Henriques describes as a spatial
way of knowing, foundational, for instance, to dancehall culture in
Jamaica.[^4] Attention to sound and where it places the body in space is
an intimate part of what I am calling “unmapping.” For example, Little
Roy’s sonic exegesis in the song “Christopher Columbus” poses a
challenge to coloniality and Western historiography. Little Roy
describes the multiple voyages of Columbus to the Caribbean—“Him come
again and go away”—and says that Natty Rasta, the black man, was
metaphysically in the Caribbean long before Columbus.[^5] Politicizing
Afro-Jamaican identity in ways that engage with what Jamaican theorist
Sylvia Wynter has conceptualized as *indigenization*, Little Roy
“unmaps” the Caribbean, challenging the fixity of Columbus’s colonial
map through a sonic and lyrical reordering of time and space.[^6]

In our sonic unmapping in my course, I ask students to think about how
they would map Babylon as a geographic, historic, and imagined place in
the context of reggae lyrics. Similarly, I ask them to think about the
intertextuality of reggae and Rastafari to the Hebrew Bible and the
Christian Testament. Where is the Zion that Kiddus I sings of in
“Graduation in Zion”? We also explore urban spatial politics through the
more literal and lyrical mapping of Kingston that Bob Marley performs in
“Natty Dread” by walking through First Street and Second Street, and so
on. Then we look to his son Damian Marley’s survey of the island in
“Welcome to Jamrock,” and how he sings a refrain that hails each county
of Jamaica—Cornwall, Middlesex, and Surrey—delineating a geography that
the island postcolony reclaims from the English counties it mirrors.[^7]

Reggae and dub are as much about unfinished spatial mapping as about
cosmic awareness and cosmological mapping. Music is the argument of
unmapping. Sound, like light, is energy comprised of waves, a series of
perceived reflections and refractions that orient us in time and space.
Sound reflects our relation to other bodies and objects. This sonic data
is central to a poetic strategy that I call “decolonial echolocation”—a
method of bodily knowing, a somatosensory epistemology of embodied
navigation of coloniality for those who were not mean to survive. It is
the diasporic physiological process of sensing distant or invisible
objects by sound waves emitted back to the emitter, to draw on the
dictionary definition of *echolocation*.

The map is engraved with the echo of runaway desire, of refusal, in
place names like the District of Look Behind, Don’t Come Back, and Quick
Step. A decolonial register would imply a strategy of detecting the
colonizer and finding spaces of refuge. This refuge is encoded in both
reggae music and Rastafarian ontology. Rastafari, which Stuart Hall
describes as an “imagined community” formed with an Africa that has
moved on but is nevertheless symbolically reconstructed in music, is a
form of worlding and navigation beyond coloniality, never quite intended
as a literal return to Africa. Echolocation resonates with music as
integral to the archipelagic being of Jamaican reggae artist Chronixx
when he sings of “capture land.” It is the replantation of the provision
grounds that Wynter describes at the periphery of the colonial
plantation.[^8] The echoes that reverberate through the karstic
mountainous terrain of Jamaica’s Cockpit Country and Blue Mountains are
an intimate part of Caribbean geography that narrates the meaning of
refuge for black and Native peoples on the island.

To geolocate Caribbean space through literature and music is to chart
archipelagic being. It decenters ocularcentric forms of knowledge
production and the written word. Archipelagic being attunes one to the
power of *other* senses to orient oneself in space. Sound—in particular,
how we receive certain frequencies—engages the sensorium in a way that
is central to a Caribbean vestibular sensibility.

Unmapping as a digital praxis embraces the opacity of sensory
disorientation. If mapping is about knowing and surveying, then
unmapping is about unknowing and uncharting the territory. To welcome
not knowing allows one to be receptive to other forms of knowledge. The
West Indies are, after all, a misnaming, so why continue to depend on a
Columbian geographic misrecognition for reading the archipelago? The
colonial map obscures this relationality of Wynter’s indigenization and
Kamau Brathwaite’s creolization by enforcing the geography of the
European metropole on the archipelago.[^9] Toward unmapping, I challenge
my students to consider a spatial politics centering spaces of Caribbean
refuge carved out by indigenous peoples and Maroons across the
archipelago. Some clues are embedded in place names, but again, music
becomes central, especially for examining the hidden African presence
indigenized in the landscape. Unmapping therefore challenges the myth of
extinction in favor of intentional Caribbean opacity, in the Glissantian
register.[^10]

The Caribbean archipelago was formed through a process of layering that
I have elsewhere described as “racial sedimentation.”[^11] I argue that
the sedimented presences settle and become transformed in metamorphic
rock in accordance with the geological metaphor of the rock cycle.[^12]
The materiality of bodies, bones, and decomposing biomatter have become
part of the geology of the archipelago over the centuries since
Columbus’s invasion. Mutilation has made the Caribbean the site of,
according to Hortense Spillers, a “human sequence written in
blood.”[^13] Maroon strategies of warfare, especially guerilla warfare,
against the British in Jamaica depended on the cover the rainforest
provided, and locations in Cockpit Country are accordingly named to
reflect these battles. I task my students with examining how the
topography of the Caribbean—its crags, its valleys, its mountains, its
caves, its ravines—has provided refuge. I wanted to design a digital
platform that could represent distinct racialized copresences and
coproductions enmeshed through settlement. If, as historian Vincent
Brown writes, we ought to consider *marronage* as a species of West
African warfare, then what are the political stakes of a map that speaks
or sings in Maroon vernaculars?[^14]

Committing Treason with the Master’s Tools 
-------------------------------------------

In 2018, I embarked on the digital project [*Unmapping the Caribbean:
Sanctuary and
Sound*](https://nyuds.maps.arcgis.com/apps/MapSeries/index.html?appid=489f1aee6b324a75b709d5d37f0cea2a)
with my students and a team of technologists.[^15] As a method,
unmapping challenges the fixity of the map as a technology of colonial
organization. As a medium, I used [ArcGIS Story
Maps](https://storymaps.arcgis.com/),[^16] a cloud-based platform by
international geographic information system (GIS) software supplier Esri
(Environmental Systems Research Institute), and, in light of our
decolonial mission, there were necessarily many limitations and ethical
concerns with which to contend. Founded in 1969 as a land-use consulting
firm, US-based Esri evolved into a GIS software vendor embedded in the
history of US military defense digital technology, holding contracts
with the US Department of Defense. As a global tech company, Esri
perhaps typifies, to reference Audre Lorde’s famous provocation, the
“master’s tools”—that is, the structure of the ongoing colonial
present.[^17] But I knew that the technologists helping with the project
had the most proficiency with this platform because of the contracts
Esri had with the university where I worked.

[Esri Story Maps](https://storymaps-classic.arcgis.com/en/) describes
its educational mission as a strategy of digital storytelling by and
through graphic organization.[^18] The platform hosts maps that users
can design themselves using the Esri database. But a project need not
actually be a map—the emphasis is on narrative, which is why I find it
so appealing. Esri is essentially a platform for presenting graphic,
multimedia information, into which ArcGIS maps can be easily integrated,
if you so choose. Another reason I used Esri Story Maps is its
accessibility—both in the ease of not needing to download or install a
program, since it runs online, and in being able to reach it through
mobile devices. Since starting the *Unmapping* project, I began a new
job at a university, and while it also has a contract with Esri, the
platform is not for use by large numbers of students. As such, I am in
the process of devising new forms of unmapping that will engage XR
(extended reality), which includes mixed reality, open-source AR
(augmented reality), and VR (virtual reality) tools such as Unity. The
digital amplifies the prospect for a cartographic synesthesia, which is
why the potential of embedding digitized sound and video offers so many
narrative and epistemological possibilities.

The transparency that military technologies prioritize for the purpose
of warfare and seizing dominion is the antithesis of my goal for reading
the archipelago. My digital praxis instead employs a cartographic
approach to Glissantian opacities—that is, to what remains unknown and
unknowable about the Caribbean. My hope is that modes of storytelling
can be enhanced experientially through a digital sensorium, a range of
audiovisual features that lead to an immersive experience. The body is a
geography of inheritances, knowledges, and intuitions that military
technologies will never comprehend. With its arteries, veins, and
capillaries; its curves; its wrinkles—the body is a terrain, unmapped
and unmappable. Thus as someone of Caribbean descent, I began with my
body, literally using my hand to anchor the project. I sought to locate
the where the affective mutual coordinates of the “intimacies” of
Africa, Asia, and Europe meet in the Caribbean.[^19]

The first European map of the Caribbean, a 1492–93 drawing by
Christopher Columbus, amounts to a few squiggles and splotches of ink
(fig. 1). It approximates the curve of the coast of what he would name
the Insula hispana, which Bartolomé de las Casas renamed Española. The
island is the epicenter, the first place of disembarking, the cradle. I
find Columbus’s map inscribed with playful desire and possibility—as
much a fantasy as a tool of navigation for further colonial conquest.
The ways Haiti and the Dominican Republic are peripheral to the map of
America, even though Columbus never stepped foot on the mainland, then
become a conundrum of hemispheric mapmaking origins. In my process of
unmapping, I was led to a later map of Hispaniola, dating to the
mid-sixteenth century, that had been drafted by Italian geographer
Giovani. Columbus’s squiggles had become solidified in a cartographic
imaginary practice that sought to “know” as much as it sought to claim
the island for European powers.

{% include image.html
  img="West Indies, Christopher Columbus Map.jpg"
  title="West Indies, Christopher Columbus, 1492–93"
  caption="Figure 1. A map of Insula hispana by Christopher Columbus, 1492–93."
  url="https://gsp.yale.edu/sites/default/files/images/hispaniola-1492map-lg.jpg" %}

For the *Unmapping* project, I challenged my students to unmap five
Caribbean locations—Hispaniola, New York City, Suriname, Cuba, and
Jamaica—through sound and attention to the body. I began the semester by
juxtaposing analog and digital processes of mapping, asking each student
to draw a freehand map of the Caribbean from memory. Most were
exasperated by the challenge, realizing that they were far more familiar
with the geography of Western Europe than with that of the Caribbean,
despite the latter’s more relative geographic proximity to the United
States. Students who were of Caribbean origin expressed shame at having
only “a sense” of the geography of their homelands.

{% include image.html
  img="Goffe\_Student Map1.png"
  title="Maps from Memory"
  caption="Figure 2. To start the project, students drew maps of five Caribbean locations from memory." %}

Students began to question whether Guyana, Venezuela, and Bermuda are
part of the Caribbean (I did not answer these questions until the
activity was over and we had considered the multiplicity of definitions
of archipelagic space as well as the imperial positionality implicit in
our studying the region from New York). Some of the hand-drawn maps
featured only Jamaica or Cuba; others depicted Haiti and the Dominican
Republic not on Hispaniola but as separate islands (fig. 2). While many
showed south Florida, none included New York City, where, as of 2013,
roughly a quarter of the residents were of Caribbean origin.[^20] No
maps featured Suriname, the former Dutch colony that is part of the
South American landmass; none of my students had even heard of the
country, much less the language, Sranan Tongo, or the music, *kaseko*.
For this reason, I chose to use my hand to visually represent our five
disparate but joined geographies—five separate “fingers,” part of one
“hand.” I projected Battista Ramusio’s mid-sixteenth-century map onto my
hand to juxtapose the materiality of the body and the epistemic violence
the map inscribes on flesh. My palm anchored the inquiry into the
archipelagic and served as a starting point for unmapping, a palmistry
of wayfinding (fig. 3).

{% include image.html
  img="Goffe\_YouWillFindAWay.JPG"
  title="You Will Find a Way"
  caption="Figure 3. Tao Leigh Goffe, *You Will Find a Way*, 2018. A mid-sixteenth century map projected onto my hand became the anchoring image for the *Unmapping the Caribbean* project." %}

I split the nineteen students into five groups and assigned each a
location—I then challenged them to consider how each Caribbean space
troubles the concept of the archipelago. The students exploring
Suriname, for example, reckoned with the Dutch Empire, which often gets
overlooked in the anglophone context. They contrasted the transparency
of the paved roadways of the port city Paramaribo with the geographic
opacity of the rainforest interior, parts of which are accessible only
by small private planes. I taught them about how the Netherlands traded
North New Amsterdam, now New York, for the South American New Amsterdam
of Suriname because it was a sugar colony. New York, arguably a
Caribbean city of the global North, is its own archipelago of forty-odd
islands. On Hispaniola, the linguistic, cultural, and racial fracturings
between Haiti and the Dominican Republic are as much a barrier as they
are spaces of fluid musical exchange. Cuba has existed under a state of
economic embargo and technological isolation that forms an opacity of
exclusion by the United States, the communist nation’s punishment for
its refusal to acquiesce to the US geopolitical domination in the
hemisphere. The students exploring Jamaica centered the global flows of
reggae and how these are entangled with tourism and ecological
degradation. Based on the students’ research, I used Esri’s “Map Series”
template to stitch together five story maps to form one cohesive project
with five tabs. Attention to the sensorium is amplified by the digital,
insofar as multiple registers can be experienced at once on a story
maps. It was important that the students understand how these disparate
geographies connected to each other to form one archipelago, a chain of
Caribbean/diasporic thought.

By anchoring these disparate geographies on my hand, I wanted students
to consider the significance of the body in colonizing and mapping. I
turned the image of the map superimposed on my hand into a postcard and
wrote a message from the diaspora to an imagined addressee named X—a
love letter of longing—which I then submitted to [Post(card)s from the
“en dehors garde](https://mina-loy.com/endehorsgarde/),” a digital
project on the feminist website *Mina Loy: Navigating the Avant-Garde*
(fig. 4). The project collaborators had invited artists, writers, and
scholars to write postcards expressing ideas about the *en dehors
garde*, a term they had coined to describe the women, people of color,
and others marginalized in or excluded from histories and theories of
the avant-garde. They arranged seventy postcards on the website, curated
together as a [digital flash
mob](https://mina-loy.com/chapters/avant-garde-theory-2/digital-flash-mob/).[^21] I later adapted my postcard as the landing page for [*Unmapping the
Caribbean*](file:///D:\Willow\archipelagos\arch(5)\Post(card)s%20from%20the%20‘en%20dehors%20garde,’).
Thus we began our joint unmapping quest—one professor, nineteen
students, and three technologists.[^22]

{% include image.html
  img="Goffe\_Postcard.png"
  title="Dear X"
  caption=" Figure 4. My “from the diaspora” postcard for the Post(card)s from the “en dehors garde” project, which became the landing page image for *Unmapping the Caribbean*." %}

Once the base maps were created, students then meditated on global
positioning system (GPS) technologies to consider how a Caribbean GPS
might position our five locations. Geographic information systems (GIS)
technologies such as Google Maps center individuals: for the first time
in human history the center of the map is always the self. I asked
students to grapple with what that could mean for a region like the
Caribbean, which has been rendered peripheral for so long, despite its
being the epicenter of Columbus’s destruction. I also asked students to
reckon with the power of opacity, of being off the bureaucratic map, of
being undetectable, unmappable.

Western maps are often developed and explicitly deployed as tools of
capitalist extraction invested in rendering colonial knowledge
transparent, and also as ways of marketing, surveying, and making the
land knowable and thus safe for tourists to consume. It is not
incidental that gas station maps are a genre of petro-capitalist
extractivism, considering the petrochemical infrastructure of Esso,
Shell, and British Petroleum. These maps occlude the irrevocable
ecological damage caused by Big Oil as well as the political violence of
extraction and refinement of fossil fuels in Trinidad, Venezuela, and
now Guyana and the ways these processes disproportionately threaten
Maroon and indigenous communities. But there are other types of maps,
even maps containing secret codes. There are Native Australian and Maori
maps, for instance, made from tree bark and in the shape of animals, or
maps that are guides to navigating waves at certain times of the day.
Black and indigenous navigation knowledge production of this sort is
precisely what I wanted my students to model in their design.

Me-no-Sen-You-no-Come: On Opacity and the Impossibility of Mapping
------------------------------------------------------------------

There are Caribbean spaces of refuge that evade the colonial order. I
read this refusal—this Glissantian declaration of the right to
opacity—in the place name Me-no-Sen-You-no-Come.[^23] This now-extinct
village settlement was established and named by runaways fleeing
enslavement on plantations in the parish of Trelawny in 1812.[^24]
Located in the District of Look Behind, the town thrived until
emancipation in the mid-1830s. Me-no-Sen-You-no-Come came under siege by
the British in 1824 and then by the Maroons of Accompong Town, yet the
settlement survived with up to as many as sixty resident runaway peoples
into the 1820s. It might at first seem that Maroons would have been
natural allies for other runaways, but because of Maroon leader Cudjoe’s
1736 land treaty with the British, Jamaican Maroons were supposed to
return non-Maroon runaways to British plantations. To find
Me-no-Sen-You-no-Come would require an archipelagic wayfaring and
wandering, a kind of intellectual Glissantian errantry.

In many ways, just as the Caribbean refuses to be known to the colonial
authority, it refuses to be mapped. It is an aqueous and geological
geography of mangroves, caves, and coral reefs that cannot be surveyed
and conquered entirely. I asked my students to embrace this
impossibility.[^25] I assigned excerpts of feminist scholar Macarena
Gomez-Barris’s *The Extractive Zone*, encouraging students to consider
what should *not* be mapped. Gomez-Barris describes her work as
proceeding from a decolonial femme methodology, “a mode of porous and
undisciplined analysis shaped by the perspective and critical
genealogies that emerge within these spaces as a mode of doing
research*.*”[^26] Gomez-Barris’s meditation on opacity as a shield, a
form of resistance to extractivist geospatial technologies, illuminated
for students how mapping was a thorny endeavor, especially for
indigenous communities of the Amazon. These technologies can never be
truly disentangled from the visuality and transparency of coloniality.

Ethical mapping is a question of how to show the way to those with good
intentions. Me-no-Sen-You-no-Come is unequivocal in this regard: If I do
not send for you, you will never find your way here. The place name has
its own opacity. Black feminist historian Tina Campt poignantly defines
*opacity* as a type of refusal, different from resistance in that it can
involve at-times-subtle tactics of performing illegibility and inaction
as a form of defiance.[^27] The place name Me-no-Sen-You-no-Come
signifies a fleeting moment of freedom before freedom was formalized in
1834. The runaways who settled there mattered enough to be inscribed on
the colonial map. In the patwa inflection of dashes in the village’s
name, I hear the shorthand rhythm of the lilt of “nation language,” of
creole Caribbean tongues.[^28] The land refuses in defiance. The
toponymy commands. The symmetry and pace of the patwa phrase says
something altogether mystical, distinct from what would be the literal
English (mis)translation, “If I do not send for you, you do not come.”
The Jamaican phrase is clear and concise. It declares how *you* can act
toward *me*. It declares the right to not be touched, the right to be
left alone.[^29]

My unmapping project was inspired by travels to the Caribbean. It is a
place I will always feel disjointed from, having been born in the
metropole, London. In 2017 I visited the Windsor Caves in Cockpit
Country, not far from Me-No-Sen-You-No-Come, where I experienced the
chilling majesty of thousands of bats cascading from the cave at
dusk.[^30] They flew past my face, dodging and diving elegantly,
screeching, swiftly flying out of a cold cave, their space of refuge, a
cathedral of shelter from the rays of sunlight during the day. Bats have
an intimate way of knowing, of hearing, of navigating by ultrasound
beyond the range of the human ear. Sylvia Wynter considers this fact in
“Towards the Sociogenic Principle,” describing Thomas Nagel’s
description of the consciousness and being of bat sonar, the way the
mammals form three-dimensional forward perception beyond human
vocabulary. Bats are fundamentally alien to us, she says, and there is
no reason to imagine they perceive the world as we do.[^31] The Maroons
and the runaways had inhabited these caves alongside Caribbean wildlife.
Through sound, in the dark, they had learned to navigate Cockpit Country
in an intimate echolocation and engagement with nature.

The neurophysiology of bats is emblematic of an alternative way of
knowing space beyond the ocularcentric. Once the binary between human
and nonhuman animals is challenged, other sensorial epistemologies
become possible. While I was at the Windsor Caves it occurred to me that
during the time the Maroons and the runaways coexisted in interspecies
spatial intimacy in these very caves, the bats would have signaled the
time of day, the shifting of dawn and dusk; their flight, their
movements would have signaled a diurnal fugitivity and anticircadian
rhythm, another way of measuring time and navigating space through the
nonhuman world. Sensory deprivation or perceptual isolation can heighten
other senses. What did the Maroons and the runaways have to tune into
for survival? What frequencies had they been attuned to that the British
soldiers and planters would never be able to hear?

*Unmapping the Caribbean*: The Website
--------------------------------------

These questions of freedom, sovereignty, and futurity were what the
students in the Jamaica group considered for their story map (fig.
5).[^32] They titled it “Xaymaca: Wi Likkle but Wi Tallawah,”
highlighting the island’s original Arawak name Xaymaca, which means “the
land of wood and water.” This choice of title honors the location’s
indigenous origin and juxtaposes it with the patwa of a Jamaican folk
saying. Jamaican poet laureate Miss Lou riffed on the saying’s
significance and how it means that we might be a small place, but we are
mighty in impact. This small-island sensibility is integral to
archipelagic being. No map can accurately represent the size and impact
of the Caribbean on the world, flattening, as maps do, the islands into
a series of tiny dots.

The Jamaica group centered vernacular and folk knowledge with indigenous
knowledge, taking a cue from University of the West Indies professor
Carolyn Cooper’s essay “Professing Slackness: Language, Authority, and
Power Within the Academy and Without.” When they first read this essay,
my students, even those who understood patwa, were disoriented, but they
soon realized the metatheatrical stakes of writing a formal academic
article in patwa. Cooper defied traditional academic norms to profess in
what she describes as “barefoot language.” Again, the body and sexuality
are invoked here in Caribbean orality against colonial power as Cooper
explains there is a slackness that “isn’t only about sexual morality”
but rather about a “naked savagery” and a defiance of colonial norms,
including wearing “proper” clothes.[^33] To unmap through the accent of
patwa offered the students a way to theorize sonic modes of declaring
independence through the theatricality of Jamaicanisms.

{% include image.html
  img="Goffe\_Unmapping1.png"
  title="Xaymaca: Wi Likkle but Wi Tallawah"
  caption="Figure 5. The story map of Jamaica for *Unmapping the Caribbean*." %}

Engaging further with Jamaican sound, the students contrasted sonic
recordings (found on YouTube) of tourism in popular locations such as
Dunn’s River Falls with the sounds of nature—bird, bats, and frogs—in
Cockpit Country. The accents of Americans and Western Europeans form a
sonic colonialism that disrupts the local soundscape. The students found
recordings of the Jamaican Maroon language Coromantee, derived from
archaic Ghanaian languages, and embedded these into maps depicting sites
of marronage in Accompong. Drawing on what they had learned about
all-inclusive resorts and capitalist extraction from the pairing on the
syllabus of Jamaica Kincaid’s *A Small Place* and Stephanie Black’s
documentary *Life and Debt* (with voice-over of Kincaid’s text adapted
from *A Small Place*), the students contended with how the development
of tourism irrevocably altered the natural soundscape of the island. The
students remixed reggae songs using echoing and reverb DJ effects to
consider how Bob Marley forms a global sonic imaginary, putting Jamaica
and the broader Caribbean on the world map, so to speak.

The New York group was named Manahatta, the Lenape word meaning “place
where the wood is gathered.” New York City, where roughly a quarter of
the recorded population is Caribbean (as of 2013), allowed an
opportunity to meditate on how many more Caribbean people call New York
home than were counted, considering those who are not documented,
especially from Guyana and the Dominican Republic. The students in this
group had the advantage of being able to include interviews and other
recorded material from a local context. They chose the title “New York
as Caribbean City: Gentrification as Colonization” to highlight the
layers of occupation of Lenape land.[^34] The only group to directly
tackle the issue of opacity directly, the students created a landing
page that queries the intentions of those accessing the map: after the
title “Manahatta,” a warning reads, “The following is only for
individuals who have roots in the Caribbean and their allies. Do not
proceed if you do not meet the criteria stated above.” They used a flick
FBI warning against copyright infringement as the backdrop, which was a
curious choice, considering the fraught questions of jurisdiction
situating Manhattan as Lenape land. If the user does not fit the
criteria of allyship, she has the option to click “Leave” in the upper
right corner, which leads to a broken
[hyperlink](http://leave.leave.leave./)—a creative strategy for
addressing the challenges of retaining opacity and deflecting
uninvited/unwanted audiences. The key to the *Unmapping the Caribbean*
website is a decolonial practice of coalition building; these students
did not want the Manahatta map to fall into the “wrong” hands.

{% include image.html
  img="Goffe\_Unmapping2.png"
  title="New York as Caribbean City: Gentrification as Colonization"
  caption="Figure 6. A side map featuring layers of gentrification is part of the story map of New York City for *Unmapping the Caribbean*."%}

Listening is the key to opening the map. To welcome the viewers who
proceed, the students produced a forty-second soundtrack, layering the
rumbling sound of a train on subway tracks with the crashing of waves
and Caribbean salsa music and drums. This is followed by four
recordings: “Ven, este mapa es para ti”; “Cum, this map a fi yuh”; “Vini
non, map sa a se pou ou”; and “Come, this map is for you.” In each
phrase, the word *map* or *mapa* is hyperlinked and leads to an
expandable side accordion story map featuring ten layers of gentrified
spaces in New York City (fig. 6). This was the perfect type of story map
for their narrative because of its capacity to enact a relational
aesthetic of layering. For example, one page features historically
Caribbean neighborhoods such as Williamsburg, home to Puerto Rican
communities like Los Sures. Similar to how the Xaymaca group aurally
focused attention on tourism, the New York group showed gentrification
by contrasting the sounds of bodegas and people playing dominos on the
street with markers of sonic colonialism—notably, the idle chatter of
gentrifying hipsters.

The students in the Suriname group, named Surinen, for the indigenous
people of that area, titled their project “Mapping the Interior:
Navigating Black and Brown Queer Intimacy.”[^35] Rather than focusing on
tensions among black and Asian communities, which we had studied in the
Eastern Caribbean, they chose to center queer intimacy between black and
Asian people in Suriname; one part of the story map is titled
“Navigating the Interior: Black and Brown Queerness.” “Mati work,” what
Dutch-Surinamese feminist theorist Gloria Wekker defines as “an old
practice among Afro-Surinamese working-class women in which marriage is
rejected in favor of male and female sexual partners,” and music were
central to their story map.[^36] The students stitched and edited
together footage from Surinamese dancehall and *kaseko* performances
with footage from pride parades and celebrations of LGBTQ life in the
country. They also wrote original poems in conversation with the concept
of the rainforest that is commonly described as “the interior” in
Suriname.

{% include image.html
  img="Goffe\_Unmapping3.png"
  title="Surinen: Mapping the Interior"
  caption="Figure 7. Part of the story map of Suriname for *Unmapping the Caribbean* pairs time-lapse video of blooming flowers with text by Gloria Wekker." %}

The Surinen story map also showcases rituals of the African-derived
religion Winti and how Amerindian and Maroon communities retain their
cultural practices. The students presented time-lapse nature videos of
flowers blooming from YouTube alongside the words of Wekker (fig. 7).
Though in the beginning of the term my students had not heard of
Suriname, by the end they had an intimate relationship with the country.
Having conducted research in Paramaribo, I personally found the sonic
rendering of the Suriname story map so powerful that it felt as though
the students had gone there to carry out this research.[^37]

The Hispaniola group, named Kiskeya/Quisqueya after the island’s
original Taíno name, focused on the contours of Afrolatinidad in the
Caribbean. These students considered how music has been a space of
Afro-Caribbean refuge and expression, and they subtitled their story map
both “A Journey through the Border” and “A Journey along the Border”
(fig. 8).[^38] Keeping in mind that several students had rendered Haiti
and the Dominican Republic as separate islands in their freehand analog
maps at the beginning of the semester (see fig. 3), they wanted to
center the connections between the two countries along their linguistic
and national border using the “Cascade” Esri Story Map, which creates an
immersive scrolling experience. The students presented how Haiti and the
Dominican Republic are joined by music and how the narratives of Taino
history inflect both nations, filling the screen with maps, 3D scenes,
images, and video.

As one of the most prominent and poetic voices on immigration and the
status of black refuge and refugees, Haitian American novelist Edwidge
Danticat served as the students’ literary guide. In her essay “Black
Bodies in Motion and in Pain,” Danticat evocatively draws connections
between black death and flight in the Mediterranean, the Great Migration
in the United States, and the deportations at the Haitian-Dominican
border. I encouraged the students to also consider the twin-island
imaginary of historic Saint-Domingue that Danticat presents in *Krik?
Krak!*[^39] They historicized their map with information about the
border, especially the 1937 “parsley massacre” and the more recent
deportations of Afro-Dominicans.[^40]

{% include image.html
  img="Goffe\_Unmapping4.png"
  title="Kiskeya/Quisqueya: A Journey along/through the Border"
  caption="Figure 8. The Hispaniola story map for *Unmapping the Caribbean* follows a journey along, and through, the border between Haiti and the Dominican Republic." %}

The students discovered that there are certain instruments that connect
Haitian music (*kadans*) to Dominican music (*bachata*). They featured
music videos of two global superstars—Dominican bacahata singer Raulín
Rodriguez and Puerto Rican merengue singer Elvis Crespo—to illustrate
how genres transcend national and geographic borders. The students also
highlighted the Haitian guitar-based Latin genre *twoubadou*, which
developed through migration across the border with the Dominican
Republic. One student, Jesse Sgambati (Jesediah), who was pursuing a
degree in recorded music, produced an original composition, an
instrumental track that blends Haitian polyrhythms and features shakers,
skin drums, and wood blocks alongside electronic elements, snares, 808
kicks, and synth sounds. The string elements of the song gesture to
merengue but are played on a *charango*, an Andean folk instrument,
which was paired with the *banza*, the banjo of Haiti. The song is a
beautiful example of sonic copresence and decolonial rhythm, and the
classroom presentation of this story map was vibrant—students began to
dance and gave the group a standing ovation.

{% include image.html
  img="Goffe\_Unmapping5.png"
  title="Cubao: Santería from Obscurity to Hypervisiblity"
  caption="Figure 9. The story map of Cuba for *Unmapping the Caribbean* explores Santería as a cultural phenomenon." %}

Continuing on the theme of negotiating and defining Afrolatiniad and
Latinx identity in the Caribbean, students in the Cuba group, named
Cubao, the original Taíno name, titled their story map “Cuban Santería:
Religious Transformation from Obscurity to Hypervisiblity” (fig.
9).[^41] The students, one of whom had filmed a documentary in Cuba the
year before, mapped the cosmology of Cuba through Santería’s global
circulation. They were interested in the retention of West African
language, rituals, and Yoruba beliefs. Dash Harris, the then Cuba-based
founder of the company Afro-Latinx Travel and a guest lecturer to my
course, described Catholicism as a cover for practicing original and
secret religion, distinct from the ways academics often flatten Santería
as a simple expression of syncretism. Though the various religions in
the Caribbean certainly retain elements from African, European, and
Asian cosmologies, it is significant to consider the mapping of saints
and orishas as a strategy as opposed to a multiculturalist celebration.
The students were fascinated by religion’s role in representing a hidden
world of performing West African rituals. I encouraged them to explore
Amerindian imagery and Chinese influences present in Cuba as well. They
organized their narrative thread around the circulation and
hypervisibility of Santería through Afro-diasporic popular musical
artists with global audiences, such as Beyoncé, who has invoked Yemaya
and Ochun, and Afro-French Cuban singers Ibeyi, the twins Lisa-Kaindé
Diaz and Naomi Diaz, who sing in multiple languages, including Yoruba.
The students compiled news footage from YouTube of the fraudulent
Santería grey economy of false practitioners, a market unsanctioned by
the Cuban government, that has arisen alongside tourism in Cuba.

Future Grounds of Sonic Unmapping
---------------------------------

Questions regarding labor, credit, and archiving are critical for this
decolonial cartography. In the interest of interrogating my and my
students’ US-based perspective, I arranged video conference sessions
with experts based in the Caribbean. In addition to our class with Dash
Harris in Cuba, we had a session with Trinidad-based Felicia Chang and
Zaake De Coninck, cofounders of the media publishing company
[Plantain](https://www.plantain.me/). Based on their expertise in oral
history, these entrepreneurs provided their digital storytelling
experience in consultation with all the groups.[^42] I also received
assistance over the years from technologist Armanda Lewis, who helped me
design templates for assessment of collaborative work and the for
logistics of the assignment.[^43] In addition, Armanda helped me design
a rubric clarifying my expectations in terms of creativity, originality,
research, citational practice, and collaboration. For the on-boarding
process and technological troubleshooting with Esri Story Maps,
technologists Michelle Thompson and Himanshu Mistry, of New York
University Libraries Data Services, were invaluable.[^44]

In the vein of Stefano Harney and Fred Moten’s *The Undercommons:
Fugitive Planning and Black Study*, I encouraged my students to consider
treason, in a metaphorical sense. If, as Moten suggests, the university
is an engine of settler colonialism—in that weapons are designed there
as well as technologies that devastate the natural environment and
financial instruments that exploit the most vulnerable with subprime
mortgages, for instance (these links were especially clear in the
Manahatta group’s story map as it paralleled gentrification and
imperialism in New York City)—then it is our duty to deploy a
university’s resources for purposes other than continuing a settler
colonial regime.[^45] Universities vary in access to resources, and I
foregrounded awareness of all the technological resources available to
students in the university, emphasizing that they are paying tuition, or
tuition is being paid on their behalf, for access to these technologies.
I made sure to investigate open-source resources as well as any software
and hardware available through university subscriptions. And if it is
“treason” to use technology for something other than its intended
purpose, then, indeed, we also committed just such an act in our
decolonial Caribbean unmapping by using technology from Esri, a company
invested in US defense contracts.

It was important for the students to see early in the semester what was
possible and that it would not necessarily require advanced computer
coding skills. They were able to experience what digital maps—data
visualizations centered on geography—could illuminate and trouble. I was
fortunate to have been introduced to [*New York
Scapes*](https://newyorkscapes.org/project/unmapping-the-caribbean/) by
Nicholas Wolf and Tom Augst, organizers in a research community for
people engaged in cultural mapping.[^46] With financial assistance from
New York Scapes, I was able to hire Ryn Stafford as project manager for
*Unmapping the Caribbean*. A former student of mine, Ryn was familiar
with the sorts of sonic creative deejaying projects I have assigned in
the past, and so they were the perfect guide to translate the project
and provide additional help to the five groups of students.[^47]

Beyond what students were able to learn about Caribbean culture through
the process of independent research for this project, they also
implicitly learned about copyright, the politics of fair use, and proper
citation practice. They meditated on the politics and ethics of
circulation as well. Who, beyond me, the professor assigning a grade,
was the intended audience? The right to copy and the concept of *the
commons* was deeply embedded in the intellectual exercise of sonic
unmapping we engaged in. Citation is politics. Citation is ethics, and
yet it is rarely done ethically. Students contended with the differences
in copyright between various jurisdictions and territories in the
Caribbean and asymmetrical imperial legal legacies. The assignment also
gave them a chance to consider the currency of cultural production and
how it does and does not travel across an archipelago of many tongues
and varying digital accessibility. []{#_heading=h.gjdgxs .anchor}

*Unmapping the Caribbean* is necessarily unfinished, much in the way
that musicologist Michael Veal describes dub music as having an
unfinished sonic quality.[^48] My project of unmapping continues as long
as my course does. It is critical that the unmapping is anchored with me
and does not belong to any institution. There will at some point be a
physical, material installation to complement and extend the digital
life of the map as an immersive process using projection mapping.
Already, moving between institutional infrastructures has required me to
be intentional about disentangling and methodically archiving students’
work: I am the guardian of the collected work. Like the image of my hand
anchors the map on the landing page, the maps accumulate as part of my
pedagogy in ways that continue to inform the layers of my research on
archipelagic being.

I must also consider, for future iterations of the project, *where* to
task my new cohort of students with unmapping. Do I ask them to map five
new locations? Perhaps Puerto Rico, St. Thomas, Miami, St. Barthes,
Toronto, Zion, Port of Spain? Or do I ask them to add layers to the maps
made by previous students? In any case, the digital space as a
repository of knowledge production becomes a growing archive of
unmapping. My students complete the course having gained new
technological or research skills that they can highlight on their
resumes and in their portfolios.

Trust Your Inner Map: \#JamaicaIsNotARealPlace
----------------------------------------------

Part of the reason the unmapping is unfinished is that I did not seek
anything definitive from the assignment, and this was vital to it being
a process of critique through undoing and unlearning colonial myths. We
were not simply remapping, and thus adding new layers of epistemic
violence and division to the land. Unmapping is a decolonial digital
praxis that embraces sensorial knowledges of black and indigenous
cosmologies. In this way it is in conversation with the hashtag
\#JamaicaIsNotARealPlace, which has been popular on Jamaican social
media. Just as Jamaica “is not a real place,” the editors of the new
Caribbean arts magazine *PREE* consider that maybe the Caribbean is not
a real place, choosing this as a theme for one of their issues.[^49]
They broaden the concept and claim about dysfunction, frustration, and
the stalled futurity of the region. In a similar spirit, I posit that
the Caribbean defies mapping because it is not a real place. The poetics
of Caribbean refusal involve exclusion as much as they can be coded as a
set of refusals. The Caribbean seeks legibility but not by everyone.
These are pertinent questions for institutions such as the University of
the West Indies Mona Geoinformatics Institute, a hub for instruction and
contract work for both the private and public sectors. There are
generations of Caribbean-trained cartographers whose genealogy is not
entirely imperial. For example, GIS specialist Michelle Thompson, of
Data Services, who was most instrumental to *Unmapping the Caribbean*,
is of Guyanese, Trinidadian, and Jamaican background and is the daughter
of a rural physical planner with the Ministry of Agriculture in Jamaica
who studied at UWI in the 1980s.

It was of special significance to be able to debut the collective
*Unmapping the Caribbean* project at the Caribbean Digital V conference
at UWI, St. Augustine, in December 2018, with my Trinidad-based
collaborators Felicia Chang and Zaake De Coninck (of Plantain), to
center Caribbean digital and artistic production. It helped to see the
project as part of an ecosystem of Caribbean diasporic digital
engagements facing similar ethical concerns, much as we had, about the
complicity of using Esri as a tool. Representation puts populations on
the map, so to speak, but certain populations may prefer to be unmapped.
If you cannot see me, you cannot colonize me. The echo of
Me-no-Sen-You-no-Come across the map resists the order of the
coloniality of mapping, where trains run on time, where people are where
they say they will be at a given time. Predictive analytics work only if
people are predictable or their habits can be easily traced, tracked,
surveilled, and learned by algorithms.

A moment that typifies \#JamaicaIsNotARealPlace is the story of my first
meeting of a distant cousin in 2014. The epigraph to this essay is drawn
from the utterance of a police officer whom my family and I had asked
for directions to my cousin’s house in Mandeville as we were driving.
Just after our query, the traffic light turned green and the policeman
zoomed away, leaving us with, “You will find a way.” His response, which
has stayed with me, was flippant, prophetic, mystical, matter of fact,
and spoken with a Jamaican affect that cannot quite be described in
English—not quite cynical but dismissive, with an air of nonchalance. So
we continued on our way, navigating by asking people on the street if
they knew where Mr. Goffe lived. We eventually encountered a few
schoolboys who replied that we could find our cousin’s house all the way
down the road and around the corner.

As frustrating as it was, in the end the policeman was correct. We found
a way. We found our cousin. His house, it turns out, did not have an
exact address. And we found him in a time capsule of sorts. Our cousin
is a collector, a hoarder of things, knickknacks mostly but also the
materials of the Afro-indigenous and colonial history of Jamaica. His
treasures were strewn across his house—Arawak arrowheads, for example,
were scattered next to wedding albums full of colonial-era images of
Jamaica’s “mulatto aristocracy.”

The disorientation of being in and journeying through Jamaica made me
realize the need to trust our inner maps, to listen to our bodies, to
crowdsource people on the roadside in order to tune into our embodied
and inherited histories. This is the type of sensorial listening that
involves not only the ear but the entire body. It is a detour through
the past in order to fashion a future (to recall the way Stuart Hall
describes negotiating Caribbean identities as a continuous process).
Unmapping is turning attention to an inner vestibular frequency, to an
inner balance of finding a way just as so many Caribbean people have had
to do to survive.

Map Key
-------

The key to unmapping was relational. I would very much like to thank
Kaiama Glover and Alex Gil for their support and inspiration in creative
technology and collaboration. Seeing their early projects at the first
Caribbean Digital conferences prompted me to dream and engage in a
vulnerable pedagogy of learning with my students assisted by
technologists. Thanks also to the anonymous readers and Kelly Martin for
attention to the shape of my narrative. None of this would be possible
without my students trusting the process of my teaching through
digital-born coauthored collaboration. A special thanks to Ryn for their
generosity, intellectual curiosity, and work as project manager.

---

[^1]: Students use Genius (formerly RapGenius) and SoundCloud. See
    “About Genius,” Genius,
    <https://genius.com/Genius-about-genius-annotated>; and “About
    SoundCloud,” SoundCloud, <https://soundcloud.com/pages/contact>.

[^2]: For the course syllabus, see
    <https://caribbeanliterature.princeton.edu/>.

[^3]: Audre Lorde, “Uses of the Erotic: The Erotic as Power,” in *Sister
    Outsider: Essays and Speeches* (Berkeley, CA: Crossing, 1984), 59.

[^4]: See Julian Henriques, “Preamble: Thinking Through Sound,”
    introduction to *Sonic Bodies: Reggae Sound Systems, Performance
    Techniques, and Ways of Knowing* (New York: Continuum, 2011),
    xv–xxxvi,
    <http://research.gold.ac.uk/id/eprint/4257/1/HenriquesSonicBodiesIntro.pdf>.

[^5]: Little Roy and Ian Rock, “Christopher Columbus,” 45rpm single,
    Tafari, 1975.

[^6]: On *indigenization*, see Sylvia Wynter, “Jonkonnu in Jamaica:
    Towards the Interpretation of Folk Dance as a Cultural Process,”
    *Jamaica Journal* 4, no. 2 (1970): 34–48.

[^7]: Kiddus I, “Graduation in Zion,” Shepherd, 1977; Bob Marley and the
    Wailers, “Natty Dread,” on *Natty Dread*, Island Records, 1974;
    Damian “Jr. Gong” Marley, “Welcome to Jamrock,” on *Welcome to
    Jamrock*, Universal Records, 2005.

[^8]: See Stuart Hall, “Negotiating Caribbean Identities,” *New Left
    Review*, no. 209 (January–February 1995): 11; Chronixx, “Capture
    Land,” on *Dread and Terrible*, Soul and Circle Music, 2014; and
    Sylvia Wynter, “Novel and History, Plot and Plantation,” *Savacou*,
    no. 5 (June 1971): 95–102.

[^9]: See Edward Kamau Brathwaite, *Contradictory Omens: Cultural
    Diversity and Integration in the Caribbean* (Mona: Savacou, 1974).

[^10]: Édouard Glissant argues for “the right to opacity”; see his
    *Poetics of Relation*, trans. Betsy Wing (Ann Arbor: University of
    Michigan Press, 1997).

[^11]: See Tao Leigh Goffe, “‘Guano in Their Destiny’: Race, Geology,
    and a Philosophy of Indenture,” *Amerasia Journal* 45, no. 1 (2019):
    27–49*.* See also Tiffany Lethabo King, *The Black Shoals: Offshore
    Formations of Black and Native Studies* (Durham, NC: Duke University
    Press, 2019); Manu Karuka, *Empire’s Tracks: Indigenous Nations,
    Chinese Workers, and the Transcontinental Railroad* (Berkeley:
    University of California Press, 2019); and Iyko Day, *Alien Capital:
    Asian Racialization and the Logic of Settler Colonial Capitalism*
    (Durham, NC: Duke University Press, 2016), all of which rigorously
    tackle the relationality of settler colonialism in forms that
    decenter whiteness.

[^12]: Trinidad and Tobagoan-born Canadian author Dionne Brand, for
    instance, takes up these questions in *A Map to the Door of No
    Return*, and Canadian scholar of black geographies Katherine
    McKittrick writes of *demonic* grounds, invoking Wynter’s provision
    grounds. See Dionne Brand, *A Map to the Door of No Return: Notes to
    Belonging* (Toronto: Vintage Canada, 2001); and Katherine
    McKittrick, *Demonic Grounds: Black Women and the Cartographies of
    Struggle* (Minneapolis: University of Minnesota Press, 2006).

[^13]: Hortense J. Spillers, “Mama’s Baby, Papa’s Maybe: An American
    Grammar Book,” *Diacritics* 17, no. 2 (1987): 67.

[^14]: See Vincent Brown, *Tacky’s Revolt: The Story of an Atlantic
    Slave War* (Cambridge, MA: Bellknap, 2020).

[^15]: See *Unmapping the Caribbean: Sanctuary and Sound*,
    <https://nyuds.maps.arcgis.com/apps/MapSeries/index.html?appid=489f1aee6b324a75b709d5d37f0cea2a>.

[^16]: See “ArcGIS Story Maps,” Esri, <https://storymaps.arcgis.com/>.

[^17]: See Audre Lorde, “The Master’s Tools Will Never Dismantle the
    Master’s House,” in *Sister Outsider*, 110–13.

[^18]: See “Classic Story Maps,” Esri,
    <https://storymaps-classic.arcgis.com/en/>.

[^19]: See Lisa Lowe, “The Intimacies of Four Continents,” in Ann Laura
    Stoler, ed., *Haunted by Empire: Geographies of Intimacy in North
    American History* (Durham, NC: Duke University Press, 2006).

[^20]: Arun Peter Lobo and Joseph J. Salvo, “Growth and Composition of
    the Immigrant Population,” in *The Newest New Yorkers:
    Characteristics of the City’s Foreign-Born Population* (New York:
    City of New York, Department of City Planning, and Office of
    Immigrant Affairs, 2013), 13,
    <https://www1.nyc.gov/assets/planning/download/pdf/data-maps/nyc-population/nny2013/nny_2013.pdf>.

[^21]: See “Post(card)s from the ‘en dehors garde,’” MinnaLoy.com,
    https://mina-loy.com/endehorsgarde/. The digital flash mob is here:
    <https://mina-loy.com/chapters/avant-garde-theory-2/digital-flash-mob/>.

[^22]: The students whose assistance has been invaluable to *Unmapping
    the Caribbean* are Moriah Dowd, Zainab Floyd, Sophia Gumbs, Awura
    Gyimah, Harmony Hemmings-Pallay, Elliot Levy, Efosi Litombe, Naomi
    Malcolm, Matthew Martinez, Michelle Mawere, Kevwe Okumakube, Massiel
    Perez, Amodhya Samarakoon, Jesse Sgambati, Tatyana Tandanpolie,
    Mahalet Tegenu, Eva Toscanos, Hawau Touray, and Xiaolong Woods.
    []{#_Hlk53737815 .anchor}Throughout the narrative I link them to
    specific parts of the project.

[^23]: See Kei Miller, *The Cartographer Tries to Map a Way to Zion*
    (Manchester, UK: Carcanet, 2014). Miller’s series of poems relay a
    conversation between a colonial mapmaker and a Rastafarian that
    includes musings on toponymy and on the narratives inscribed in the
    maps of the Caribbean. The attempt signaled by the word *tries* in
    the title is key: Miller’s cartographer will never be able to map or
    reach Zion, a place of refuge and salvation as much for the
    Israelites as for Rastafarians.

[^24]: See B. W. Higman and B. J. Hudson, *Jamaican Place Names*
    (Kingston: University of the West Indies Press, 2009).

[^25]: During this time, I discovered my colleague Mimi Onuoha’s course
    Impossible Maps at New York University, New York, New York, in which
    she is asking similar questions. See
    <https://github.com/MimiOnuoha/Impossible-Maps>.

[^26]: Macarena Gomez-Barris, *The Extractive Zone: Social Ecologies and
    Decolonial Perspectives* (Durham, NC: Duke University Press, 2017),
    xvi.

[^27]: See Tina Campt, “Black Visuality and the Practice of Refusal,”
    *Women and Performance* 29, no. 1 (2019): 79–87,
    [*https://www.womenandperformance.org/ampersand/29-1/campt*](https://www.womenandperformance.org/ampersand/29-1/campt).

[^28]: On “nation language,” see Kamau Brathwaite, “History of the
    Voice,” in *Roots* (Ann Arbor: University of Michigan Press, 1993),
    259–304.

[^29]: See Hortense Spillers, “To the Bone: Some Speculations on Touch”
    (presented at the Gerrit Rietveld Academie conference “Hold Me
    Now—Feel and Touch in an Unreal World,” Stedelijk Museum Amsterdam,
    23 March 2018),
    [*https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=AvL4wUKIfpo*](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=AvL4wUKIfpo).

[^30]: In 2017, I was hosted by Susan Koenig and Sugar Belly of the
    Windsor Research Centre, where I was able to lodge and from where I
    was led on a tour of bat caves in search of guano. Several years
    prior, I had researched guano in relation to Ian Fleming’s 1958
    James Bond novel *Dr. No*, which centers on a guano island called
    Crab Key. See Tao Leigh Goffe, “007 versus the Darker Races: The
    Black and Yellow Peril in *Dr. No*,” *Anthurium* 12, no. 1 (2015),
    article 5, <http://doi.org/10.33596/anth.280>.

[^31]: See Sylvia Wynter, “Towards the Sociogenic Principle: Fanon,
    Identity, the Puzzle of Conscious Experience, and What It Is Like to
    be ‘Black,’” in Mercedes F. Durán-Cogan and Antonio Gómez-Moriana,
    eds., *National Identities and Socio-political Change in Latin
    America* (London: Routledge, 2001), 32.

[^32]: The students who assisted with the Jamaica story map include Moriah Dowd, Efosi Litombe, Tatyana Tandanpolie, and Mahalet Tegenu.

[^33]: See Carolyn Cooper, “Professing Slackness: Language, Authority,
    and Power Within the Academy and Without,” *E-misférica: Caribbean
    Rasanblaj* 12, no. 1 (2015),
    <http://archive.hemisphericinstitute.org/hemi/en/emisferica-121-caribbean-rasanblaj/cooper>.

[^34]: The students who assisted with the New York story map include
    Awura Gyimah, Matthew Martinez, Massiel Perez, and Xiaolong Woods.

[^35]: The students who assisted with the Suriname story map include
    Zainab Floyd, Kevwe Okumakube, Amodhya Samarakoon, and Hawau Touray.

[^36]: See the synopsis for Gloria Wekker, *The Politics of Passion:
    Women's Sexual Culture in the Afro-Surinamese Diaspora* (New York:
    Columbia University Press, 2006) at
    <http://cup.columbia.edu/book/the-politics-of-passion/9780231131629>.

[^37]: After the 2016 US presidential election, through my desire to
    organize against new fascism I found community with the Sanctuary
    Coalition of New York University. I would like to thank Paula
    Chakravarrty for her generosity and her leadership of the Sanctuary
    Coalition. I contributed to the Sanctuary syllabus designed by
    graduate students and published by *Public Books*. See “Sanctuary
    Syllabus,” *Public Books*, 5 December 2017,
    [*http://www.publicbooks.org/sanctuary-syllabus/*](http://www.publicbooks.org/sanctuary-syllabus/).

[^38]: The students who assisted with the Hispaniola story map include
    Sophia Gumbs, Harmony Hemmings-Pallay, Naomi Malcolm, and Jesse
    Sgambati.

[^39]: See Edwidge Danticat, “Black Bodies in Motion and in Pain,” *New
    Yorker*, 22 June 2015 (online),
    [*https://www.newyorker.com/culture/cultural-comment/black-bodies-in-motion-and-in-pain*](https://www.newyorker.com/culture/cultural-comment/black-bodies-in-motion-and-in-pain);
    and *Krik? Krak!* (New York: Soho, 2015).

[^40]: In 1937, the Dominican dictator Rafael Trujillo ordered the mass
    killing of Haitians living in the Dominican Republic.

[^41]: The students who assisted with the Cuba story map include Elliott
    Levy, Michelle Mawere, and Eva Toscanos.

[^42]: See Plantain, <https://www.plantain.me/>. Additional consultants
    included LGBTQ rights activist Robert Taylor Jr., of Queeribbean
    (<https://www.queeribbean.com/>), who consulted with the Jamaica
    group; and performance artist Alicia Grullon, of Dominican and
    Haitian heritage and raised in New York, who helped the New York
    City group. Omar Daujahre, the deputy director of NYU’s Center for
    Latin American and Caribbean Studies, and Melissa Fuster Rivera, an
    assistant professor of food studies at Brooklyn College, both from
    Puerto Rico, also helped the New York group.

[^43]: Armanda Lewis brainstormed with me about an approach to grading
    and provided templates for peer grading.

[^44]: See “Data Services: Home,” New York University Libraries,
    <https://guides.nyu.edu/dataservices>.

[^45]: See Stefano Harney and Fred Moten, *The Undercommons:* *Fugitive
    Planning and Black Study* (Wivenhoe, UK: Minor Compositions, 2013).

[^46]: See New York Scapes, <https://newyorkscapes.org/>. *Unmapping the
    Caribbean* is included under “Projects.”

[^47]: Familiar with the rhythms of the semester, Ryn encouraged
    students to seek help at the right moments. Another former student,
    Lu Biltucci, who has an interest in cartography, provided guidance
    to my students during the initial stages of the project. In
    addition, English PhD student and technologist Grace Afsari-Mamagani
    provided a demo of the various digital decolonial mapping projects
    that are currently being made. For example, *Torn Apart /
    Separados*, a two-volume digital project designed by Manan Ahmed and
    Alex Gil that visualizes the territory and infrastructure of US
    Immigration and Customs Enforcement, was a major inspiration. See
    *Torn Apart /Separados*, vol. 1, “a rapidly deployed critical data &
    visualization intervention,” at
    <http://xpmethod.columbia.edu/torn-apart/volume/1/>; and vol. 2, “a
    deep and radically new look,” at
    <http://xpmethod.columbia.edu/torn-apart/volume/2/>.

[^48]: See Michael E. Veal, *Dub: Songscape, Studio Craft, Science
    Fiction, and the Shattering of Song Form in Jamaican Reggae*
    (Middletown, CT: Wesleyan University Press, 2007), 90.

[^49]: See *PREE*, no. 3, 2019,
    <https://preelit.com/issue-three-thecaribbeanisnotarealplace/>.
