---
layout: article
section: reviews
title: 
  "long": "*Manioc*: A Pioneer Digital Library in the Francophone Caribbean"
  "short": "Manioc Review"
doi: "https://doi.org/10.7916/archipelagos-fvgc-xs31"
author: 
- name: Jeanne Jégousso 
  shortname: Jégousso
  bio: >
    Jeanne Jégousso is an assistant professor at Hollins University, where she specializes in francophone literatures written in the Caribbean and the Indian Ocean. She is a co-editor of *Teaching, Reading, and Theorizing Caribbean Texts* (Lexington Books, 2020). 
- name: Raphaël Lauro 
  shortname: Lauro
  bio: >
    Raphaël Lauro is an assistant professor of francophone Caribbean literature at the University of Montreal. After his doctoral dissertation, *Édouard Glissant: Thinker of the World, Poet of the Earth*, he published several articles on Glissant in peer-reviewed journals. Lauro, who was Glissant's personal secretary from 2008 to 2011, also classified and completed the first inventory of the author's personal archives. 
date: December 2020
issue: 5
order: 8 
language: en
---

Harvested by pre-Columbian societies all over the Americas, manioc (also
known as cassava) has become over the centuries one of the staple foods
of this vast territory. It is associated with several myths and spirits,
and its production and transformation are grounded in a collective
effort to sustain entire communities. It comes as no surprise, then,
that the digital library [*Manioc: Bibliothèque numérique Caraïbe,
Amazonie, Plateau des Guyanes*](http://www.manioc.org), which celebrated
its ten-year anniversary in 2019, continues to nurture knowledge,
reflection, and research on history, cultures, rituals, and people of
the Caribbean and South and Central America.[^1] Indeed, this extensive
digital library of the Caribbean, Amazonia, and the Guiana Shield has
allowed for a better “understanding of the complex relationship that
these regions have maintained with the rest of the world” by making
visible a long-ignored regional heritage and by enhancing productions
from and on the Caribbean and the surrounding territories.[^2] It also
provides researchers with authentic and original documents, amounting to
tens of thousands of texts and images now accessible to users around the
world.

{% include image.html
  img="Homepage banner.png"
  title="*Manioc* Homepage Banner"
  caption="The banner from the homepage of *Manioc: Bibliothèque numérique Caraïbe, Amazonie, Plateau des Guyanes*." %}

Started in 2006 and launched in 2009, *Manioc* initially aimed to
collect disseminated texts and historical sources from different time
periods, before diversifying to include contemporary materials and
promoting its abundant catalogue to aid new academic research and
general enquiries. Once a preliminary phase of digitization provided a
first wave of documents, the digital library broadened its area of
expertise and activity. Going beyond its original mission to preserve
and share archives, *Manioc* established a series of partnerships with
private collections, research departments, regional libraries, and
documentation services to conserve documents, augment the site's
content, increase its exposure, and answer a growing demand from
scholars around the world.

Co-led and co-managed by the library services of the University of the
Antilles and the University of French Guiana,[^3] the collaborative
project benefits from the support of private
[partners](http://www.manioc.org/partenaires.html), such as the Clément
Foundation, in Martinique, and of public institutions both in the
Caribbean and France, including the Guyanese association Grappe ORkidé;
the *Digital Library of the Caribbean*; the National Library of France
and its digital platform, *Gallica*; the Culture, Education, and
Environment Council of Martinique; and the French Department of
Education.[^4] Today *Manioc* has secured strong ties with more than
fifteen institutions on both sides of the Atlantic, and, by also
bringing together several databases, *Manioc* has accomplished the
centralization of thousands of collections, cementing its position as a
leader in Caribbean digital initiatives.

According to Anne Pajard, a trained engineer who leads and manages
*Manioc* from the Schœlcher campus in Martinique, it makes sense that
such a challenging project found its rhizomatic roots within the
Caribbean and South American regions: “In the 1970s, university
libraries of the Caribbean took on a specific role given the
deficiencies of public libraries, the vulnerability of patrimonial
holdings in a tropical climate, and the influence of intellectual
movements engaged in the postcolonial reconstruction of society.”[^5] In
fact, *Manioc*'s team illustrates this idea by creating and maintaining
a network of librarians, scholars, and institutions across the Caribbean
Sea and its surrounding coasts, keeping alive the “manioc
civilization.”[^6] Alongside a scientific committee led by Gerry L'Etang
(professor of anthropology at the University of the Antilles) and
Sylvain Houdebert (director of the Documentation Services in
Martinique), *Manioc* is run by [a
team](http://www.manioc.org/presentation.html) of ten people, scattered
throughout Martinique, Guadeloupe, and French Guiana, tasked with
cataloging, documentation services, and other technical duties.[^7]

{% include image.html
  img="A preview of Manioc's homepage.png"
  title="*Manioc* Homepage Content"
  caption="A preview of the Manioc homepage. The site's content is organized into five categories, each with two to five subsections, some of which indicate the number of materials available." %}

The *Manioc* digital library is mainly organized into five categories,
displayed on the [homepage](http://www.manioc.org/): “Patrimoine”
(“Heritage”); “Thématiques” (“Themes”); “Recherche” (“Research”);
“Création” (“Creation”), a collection of new initiatives; and “Revues
universitaires” (“Scholarly Journals”). Each section is then divided
into anywhere from two to five subsections, with some headings
indicating how many documents are viewable. The section “Patrimoine,”
for example, offers “Livres anciens” (“Rare Books”), with 2,698
documents; “Images,” a collection of more than 15,000 items; and
“Catalogue collectif des périodiques,” a valuable collection of hundreds
of periodical titles, essentially from the Caribbean cultural
production. The section also offers two slavery databases: the
still-expanding “Esclaves de Guyane” (“Slaves of French Guiana”) and the
“Esclavage en Martinique,” (“Slavery in Martinique”) which concerns more
than 14,700 enslaved people and indexes more than 3,200 notarial
reports. The “Thématiques” section is subdivided into the topics “Or”
(“Gold”) and “Esclavage et résistances” (“Slavery and Resistance”),
which might have presented a more substantial thematical category about
slavery in the Americas had it been combined with the two preceding
subsections. From this organization of the site structure emerges the
project's main goal—to go beyond the role of a digital library and to
render “visible the invisible,” creating a space where indigenous people
of the Caribbean, anticolonial struggles, and Creole and minor languages
studies can take the forefront. As a digital initiative, *Manioc*
gathers materials from several fields, making it an interdisciplinary
platform aimed at uniting all useful information pertaining to this
cultural area.

The “Création” section demonstrates more explicitly the diversity of
materials available on *Manioc*. The first subsection, “Écritures
contemporaines Caraïbe—Amazonie” (“Contemporary Caribbean and Amazonian
Writings”)—a project begun in January 2019—aims to gather archives and
unpublished and rare documents related to Caribbean authors. The first
collection (as of March 2020) is dedicated to Guadeloupean writer Maryse
Condé, who donated her archives to the University of the Antilles. This
section notably includes her 1976 doctoral thesis; an unpublished novel,
*Les parisiens*; several interviews and photographs; recent scholarship
on her work; and a forum through which users are invited to help
complete the digital bibliography of work by and on Condé. The second
subsection, “Mémoires et creations” (“Memory and Creation”), focuses on
the work of photographers whose themes relate to the intangibility of
cultural heritage, including the Italian photographer Nicola Lo Calzo,
who has been developing the “Cham Project” for the past ten years,
distilling in photographic form the memories of slaves, resistance, and
abolitionist struggles from all across the Atlantic.

{% include image.html
  img="The first collection of \_Ecriture contemporaine Caraïbe - Amazonie\_ dedicated to Guadeloupean author Maryse Condé.png"
  title="Écriture contemporaine Caraïbe—Amazonie"
  caption="In “Écriture contemporaine Caraïbe—Amazonie” (under “Création”), the first collection is dedicated to Guadeloupean author Maryse Condé." %}

In practical terms, the library hosts more than twenty-one thousand
documents and provides access to more than thirty thousand additional
items from other web portals*.* The historical documents (numbering
around two thousand, including essays, novels, travel notebooks,
pamphlets, poetry, and administrative notes, as well as nine thousand
images dating from the seventeenth to the twentieth century) come
primarily from private and public collections that were digitized
specifically for the project in its early stages. Contemporary documents
were gathered mostly from faculty, students, and staff during colloquia
and symposiums organized at the University of the Antilles. More than
two thousand videos have been collected during these events. Having this
temporal duality between historical and contemporary materials on a
single platform allows for an ongoing dialog between the past and the
present. This makes for a dynamic space and highlights *Manioc*'s
intention to be emblematic of a “Caribbean library,” which does not meet
the criteria of a linear history, as explained by Martinican author
Édouard Glissant in *Caribbean Discourse*: “Our quest for the dimension
of time will therefore be neither harmonious nor linear.”[^8]

Based on the ascertainment that a gap has existed between old and
contemporary collections, revealing a problem of circulation between
productions, *Manioc*'s team also developed projects in four categories:
archival, scientific, editorial, and creative. The initiative “Catalogue
collectif des périodiques Caraïbes-Amazonie” was launched to preserve,
archive, and index mostly contemporary local periodicals (see the
“Patrimoine” section). As of today, these abundant and diverse
bibliographical references are linked to physical collections across
sixteen libraries. We hope to initiate soon a digitization project to
make those precious and often confidential documents accessible online.
Sciencewise, *Manioc* supports the [Program of Applied Research to
Popular Medicine in the Caribbean](http://www.tramil.net) (TRAMIL),
which includes the work of more than two hundred experts in the fields
of ethnobotany, chemistry, pharmacology, medicine, and social work (see
the “Recherche” section).[^9] As for the editorial category, the digital
library promotes three publications led by faculty members at the
University of the Antilles: [*Études
Caribéennes*](http://etudescaribeennes.revues.org),
[*Archipélies*](https://www.archipelies.org), and [*Contextes et
Didactiques*](https://journals.openedition.org/ced/) (see the “Revues
universitaires” section).[^10] Lastly, creatively speaking, the
subsection “Mémoires et creations” includes work by contemporary artists
focusing on traditional activities and rituals shared widely across
Caribbean region (see the “Création” section).

Technically, *Manioc* is an open-access library, meaning all documents
can be accessed, consulted, and downloaded for free from any location*.*
The platform's efficient search engine (OAI-PMH protocol) is connected
not only to *Manioc*'s own database but to those of its partners as
well, such as *Gallica* at the National Library of France. In addition
to traditional parameters available in advanced searches (e.g.,
languages, time period, author, topic, publisher, title, etc.), users
may also choose which additional portals they would like to include in
their search (*Digital Library of the Caribbean*, University of the West
Indies, *Gallica*, HAL-UA, and *Thèses en ligne*)*.* Because of this
interconnectivity and the ongoing addition of ancient and recent
documents, *Manioc* has become over the years more than a research space
for scholars in humanities and social sciences; it is also a documentary
space for society, contributing to the legitimization of cultures by
promoting and highlighting Caribbean and Amazonian heritage while
granting a relatively unfettered continuous access to knowledge.
According to data shared by Anne Pajard at ACURIL 2014, the forty-fourth
annual meeting of the Association of Caribbean University, Research, and
Institutional Libraries, more than nine hundred thousand articles were
downloaded from the website between 2009 and 2014.

A pioneer in the field of digital Caribbean studies, *Manioc* has
evolved significantly over the past eleven years and is now pursuing
technological improvements. The project's team is working on completely
revamping the *Manioc* site with updated design and software in
anticipation of inevitable technological obsolescence and to correct
certain operational issues in an effort to perfect the platform's
organization, visibility, management of materials, and accessibility.
Currently designed with DRUPAL, the site will soon be redesigned with
Omeka S, which will allow, for example, an easier integration of
[GeoNames](https://www.geonames.org) interfacing and dynamic maps.[^11]
Moreover, the team has collectively decided to revise the website's
languages, which might bring further international collaborators,
notably in the anglophone and hispanophone Caribbean. As of today, the
site is in French and can be automatically translated by Google into
English and Spanish, which leaves a lot to be desired. Other
modernizations comprise creating more persistent uniform resource
locators, increasing the variety of collections, and outsourcing some of
its content. These long-term efforts and updates will certainly improve
a digital tool already effective in helping researchers and inspiring
important collaborations.

*Manioc* also hosts a blog and maintains an active presence on social
networks. The team shares detailed studies and special features that
highlight library documents and collections, while prompting questions
about historical figures, Caribbean cultural traditions, and past and
current events. Through Facebook and Instagram, they relay happenings
and bring attention to items that would otherwise go unnoticed. In fact,
the site allows a ceaseless circulation between collections, offering
the possibility to discover numerous documents one might not necessarily
have searched for (much like falling into an archival box or a YouTube
rabbit hole). This asset might also be an inconvenience of this digital
library. Nonetheless, we are sure that the improvements now being made
will make for a more focused research experience in the future.

A precious and invaluable tool for scholars, students, and all curious
minds, *Manioc: Bibliothèque numérique Caraïbe, Amazonie, Plateau des
Guyanes* has facilitated and will continue to facilitate research on
history, culture, and knowledge production in the Americas, especially
in the Antilles and French Guiana. This archipelagic digital library
links together disseminated collections and puts in relation knowledge
sources of various origins, time periods, and mediums, thus creating a
rhizomatic atemporal platform—a mirror of the Caribbean. Thanks to its
plurality of horizons, *Manioc* assembles, without reducing or
summarizing, all this diversity into a rich, imminently plurilingual
catalogue, reflecting the heterogeneity and multifariousness of the
Caribbean archipelago.

---

Since 2017, Jégousso and Lauro have managed the *Library of Glissant Studies* project (wwww.glissantstudies.com), a collaborative digital bibliography collecting the scattered works of Édouard Glissant and the critical texts related to his oeuvre.


---

[^1]: See http://www.manioc.org. The site is in French, with links for
    Google translation to English and Spanish.

[^2]: “Compréhension des relations complexes que ces régions ont
    entretenu avec le reste du monde”; Anne Pajard, “Manioc.org: Une
    bibliothèque numérique aux racines de la Caraïbe-Amazonie,”
    *Ar(abes)ques*, no. 86 (July–September 2017): 20.

[^3]: At the time of *Manioc*'s creation, these universities were a
    single entity, the University of the French West Indies and Guiana.

[^4]: For a complete list of partners, see “Partenaires,” *Manioc*,
    http://www.manioc.org/partenaires.html.

[^5]: “Les bibliothèques universitaires de la Caraïbe ont pris dans les
    années 1970 une place spécifique liée aux carences de la lecture
    publique, à la vulnérabilité particulière du patrimoine en climat
    tropical et à l'influence des mouvements intellectuels engagés dans
    la reconstruction postcoloniale de la société,” Pajard,
    “Manioc.org,” 21.

[^6]: See Patrice Bidou, “Une civilisation du manioc amer,” in *Le mythe
    de Tapir Chamane: Essai d'anthropologie psychanalytique* (Paris:
    Jacob, 2001), 56–57.

[^7]: See “Présentation,” *Manioc*,
    http://www.manioc.org/presentation.html.

[^8]: See Édouard Glissant, *Caribbean Discourse: Selected Essays*,
    trans. J. Michael Dash (Charlottesville: University of Virginia
    Press, 1992), 106.

[^9]: See also TRAMIL, http://www.tramil.net.

[^10]: See also *Études Caribéennes*,
    http://etudescaribeennes.revues.org; *Archipélies*,
    https://www.archipelies.org; and *Contextes et Didactiques*,
    https://journals.openedition.org/ced/.

[^11]: See https://www.geonames.org.
