---
layout: project
section: projects
title: 
  "long": "Mapping the Haitian Revolution"
  "short": "Mapping the Haitian Revolution"
doi: "https://doi.org/10.7916/archipelagos-mx57-xz29"
author: 
- name: Stephanie Curci
  shortname: Curci
  bio: >
    Stephanie Curci is an instructor and chair of the English Department at Phillips Academy in Andover, Massachusetts.  In addition to her work on this project, she has maintained Mapping Haitian History (a visual records project) since 2007, a project she described in the Journal of Haitian Studies in 2008.
- name: Christopher Jones
  shortname: Jones
  bio: >
    Christopher Jones is a scholar of the American Civil War, 19th Century America, and African American history. His research explores race, memory, and masculinity in post-Civil War America. He is an instructor of history at Phillips Academy, Andover.
date: December 2020
issue: 5
order: 7
image: images/issue05/haitian-revolution.png
thumb: images/issue05/haitian-revolution-thumb.png
link: "https://www.mappinghaitianrevolution.com/"
---


How many of us, as university professors, have found ourselves teaching
college students in the fields of, for example, Africana studies,
American studies, Latin American studies, and history, among others,
whose knowledge of Haiti's revolution is strikingly limited if not
entirely nonexistent? How many of us have had to teach into the void of
disinformation that has long excluded Haiti from the so-called Age of
Revolutions? The extent to which Haiti's struggle for independence has
been effectively silenced from US-American "common knowledge" is
remarkable. Moreover, it is a failing we can attribute at least in part
to the omission of Haiti from secondary education curricula across the
country. The [*Mapping the Haitian Revolution*](https://www.mappinghaitianrevolution.com/)
aims to push back against that particular lacuna by providing to high
school educators a rich and dynamic online pedagogical resource,
featuring compellingly presented historical information as well as
sample syllabi and bibliographical resources.[^1]

*archipelagos* review
---------------------

### Contribution

­Teaching the Haitian Revolution, with its many stages, actors, and
battles, can be an overwhelming task for educators. Stephanie Curci and
Christopher Jones, instructors at Phillips Academy Andover (of English
and history, respectively), have taken up the *Haitian Revolution Axis
Map* project to bring clarity to the complicated narrative of the
Haitian Revolution in ways that will most certainly help high school
teachers integrate the history of the Haitian Revolution and of
enslavement in the Americas into their classrooms. [^2]

The site authors have included a brief bibliography and multilingual
resources in the "About" section to provide increased context to
educators wanting to learn more about the Haitian Revolution. This
section also includes syllabi for tenth- and twelfth-grade units,
featuring readings by scholars such as Michel-Rolph Trouillot, Laurent
Dubois, and John D. Garrigus. Charts on Saint Domingue's population
growth, Léger-Félicité Sonthonax's emancipation proclamation, and links
to the Institut de Sauvegarde du Patrimoine National's historical
bulletins are also provided. It should be noted that the bibliography
currently omits some of the websites, charts, and bulletins that appear
in the map's narrative and events

High school teachers would benefit from a quick guide and webinar on how
to use this resource, as well as a document on terminology, especially
for educators not familiar with the Haitian Revolution in such detail
and who perhaps have less time to cover the topic. Additionally, having
an option to download PDFs of the site's content would increase
accessibility. To facilitate the project's integration into curricula,
the creators might also recommend varied approaches to the topic for
different learners and provide more information about how the site fits
curriculum standards.

### Design

The *Haitian Revolution Axis Map* is quite easy to navigate, offering
several ways of interacting with the timeline. One can, for example,
press the large "Play" button on the bottom left of the map so that the
timeline automatically chronicles the project's narrative in its
entirety. It should be noted that while the narrative moves quickly, the
site allows the user to pause and focus if additional time is needed to
look at the fascinating details. An events timeline located just below
the map allows the user to manually move through the history in respect
to particular sections of the map and to then click on the circles and
square boxes that highlight particular bits of information, including
battles, notable figures, and colonial powers. Alternatively, the user
can choose instead to jump to different designated time periods (for
example, "1791–1798: Louverture's Rise to Power") by selecting from a
dropdown menu at the top left or by selecting individual points on the
timeline below the map.

The different time periods determined by the site authors provide
varying degrees of detail and context for actors, events, and battles.
Each section begins with a brief description and a list of events. This
list provides the user with additional information, including references
to archival materials, secondary sources, and other teaching materials.
The top of the map provides a list of event types, which are designated
by evocative icons: multiple people for colonial settlements, swords to
reference battles, and a fire symbol to indicate revolts. The map also
provides color-coded indicators of the actors involved in each time
period and includes an option to focus solely on the map without any
thumbnails appearing. The home button feature allows the user to zoom in
closer to view the details of the events and actors mentioned in each
time period. All these design elements make clear the thoughtfulness and
care the creators put into the user interface. The map is intuitive and
engaging in every respect.

### Credit

The central feature of the website is the collection of maps used to
narrate the island's shifting borders. The archival sources for these
maps are carefully cited and include the Bibliothèque Nationale de
France; the John Carter Brown Library, at Brown University; the Florida
Museum of Natural History, at the University of Florida; and Yale
University, among others. I commend the creators for the multilingual
references, which include work by scholars such as Marlene Daut, Nathan
H. Dize, Carolyn E. Fick, P. Gabrielle Foreman, and Julia Gaffield, as
well as resources from the Digital Library of the Caribbean and the
Slave Voyages Database. Many examples of existing digital scholarship
projects are listed as well. Further, the project complements digital
humanities work such as Nicole Willson's [*Fanm
Rebèl*](https://www.fanmrebel.com/), which highlights stories of women
insurgents in the Haitian Revolution.[^3] The current resources list
might be expanded by citing the [*Haitian History
Blog*](https://haitianhistory.tumblr.com/readinglist) on Tumblr, which
currently has an extensive list of books on Haiti divided by time
period.[^4]

Support for the site comes from the Tang Institute at Phillips Academy
Andover, a private university preparatory school located in
Massachusetts, and Axis Maps built the custom website. This to say that
the project relies on resources that might not be readily available to
other high school teachers and was not built on open-source technology.
I would recommend that the site authors make all documentation for the
creation of the map openly accessible.

### Preservation

No information is currently provided regarding site maintenance. In
addition, given that digital scholarship projects about Haiti continue
to emerge, the creators would do well to decide—and to indicate—whether
and how often they will update the project site and its many resources.

Overall, the "[Haitian Revolution Axis Map](http://haiti.axismaps.io/)"
is an ambitious and beautifully realized project. Though its stated
target audience is primarily high school teachers and students, the
platform might also serve as a resource for college students in
entry-level courses. There is no question that it will be incredibly
generative for educators seeking to push back against the persistent
silence that surrounds the Haitian Revolution in US pedagogical
contexts.

Response by site authors Stephanie Curci and Christopher Jones
--------------------------------------------------------------

We would like to begin with a sincere thank you to the editors of
*archipelagos* and the outside reviewer of our digital project.

The [*Mapping the Haitian Revolution*](https://www.mappinghaitianrevolution.com/) project works as
a companion piece to our efforts to teach the Haitian Revolution in a
high school setting. We have long been struck by the lack of good map
sequences of the Revolution. While there are a small number of existing
maps in books on the Revolution, these are usually minimal because of
their publishing cost (these maps were nonetheless immensely helpful and
are listed in our "Works Cited"). Although there has been a significant
growth in digital Haitian studies since Stephanie Curci first embarked
on her visual records project *Mapping Haitian
History* in 2007, nothing
exists for the Haitian Revolution like the map and timeline materials
readily available for other historical events of similar consequence.
This was something we believed could and should be remedied.

Our strengths are more pedagogical than digital, but we initially tried
to make the site with the open-source format Omeka. It soon became clear
that what we hoped to show on our map and timeline was more complicated
than what we could achieve with any of the tools we were capable of
managing on our own. Although a tool such as
[ThingLink](https://www.thinglink.com/), which we have used for student
projects, might have accomplished some of the spatial work, and a site
such as [Timeline](https://timeline.knightlab.com/) from Knightlab could
have created some of the timeline, we needed to represent the unique
topographies, swiftly unfolding events, and dynamic changes in areas of
control that marked the Revolution.[^5] Haiti is challenging to visit
for scholars and students, and we felt a particular investment in not
only the concrete history but also the Revolution's key physical
locations. For example, it was in the process of creating the map that
we noted how often mountain ridges helped to delineate the limits of
regional control. Inspired by Vincent Brown's site [*Slave Revolt in
Jamaica*](http://revolt.axismaps.com/) and with generous support from
the [Tang Institute at Andover](https://tanginstitute.andover.edu/), we
pivoted from attempting an open-source map to an animated map project
constructed by [Axis Maps](https://www.axismaps.com/).[^6] We chose for
our base image a French map from 1803 (the year France lost its battle
for the colony) that had been built on earlier maps and that highlighted
well the island's mountainous terrain, its rivers, and its coastline. We
hand-drew a seventeen-map progression, each aspect of which was then
entered into a spreadsheet (including GPS points, events, and text) and
plotted and animated by Axis Maps. This approach met almost all our
needs. We would have liked, for example, to have included an animated
illustration of forts across the country to illustrate the scale and
significance of Jean-Jacques Dessalines's defense project. Also, each
map's events are highlighted separately, even if they were happening
simultaneously; showing discrete events, as opposed to showing them all
at once, perhaps weakens their collective power. For the most common
question about the project—When do we believe the Revolution started and
when did it end?—we provide a partial answer through our choice to start
the progression of maps with Taino kingdoms ("0–1492—Taino Ayiti") and
end with "current" borders ("1844–2019—Current Haitian Borders"). 

In terms of site preservation, we are able to edit the spreadsheet that
populates the seventeen maps in the progression, if the map content
needs to be updated or revised, and we will continue to update
resources, educational materials, and links on the site. While editorial
access allows us to modify most things—from narrative to map titles to
events to locations on the maps—we cannot alter the map base or the
"areas of control" themselves (either would require more work from Axis
Maps and, though not out of the question, would be beyond the scope of
our original project). The static HTML (hypertext markup language)
portions of the site are not updatable by us, which is why our beta
version used Google Docs for any narrative information that required
frequent updates, such as our working syllabi and resources. These
limitations also meant that our beta site did not have an updated "Works
Cited" page for each link in the "Events" section, for instance. There
are many opportunities for linking to other Haitian studies digital
sites, and now that the bulk of the main project has been completed,
those links will continue to be developed. Much of this work has already
been added to our revised site.

As a result of this review, we have we have built a landing page with clearer resources for teachers and students. We have
also renamed the project more clearly as *Mapping the Haitian
Revolution*. We believe this transition will be a more effective
starting point for map users and will better integrate the supplementary
elements of our site. This change has allowed us to turn our
bibliography into an active "Works Cited" page, which will be important
as we incorporate and link to more digital humanities projects in
Haitian studies as they emerge. The reviewer's suggestion of adding
sites such as *Fanm Rebèl* and the *Haitian History Blog* on Tumblr was
a helpful one, and those can now be found among our
[resources](https://www.mappinghaitianrevolution.com/resources).[^7]

A focus of our coursework and of any legitimate study of the Haitian
Revolution is to understand how power works both in history and through
the construction of historical and literary narratives. We are thus
interested in thinking about how we might highlight other scholars' work
in this area. For example, in addition to all the forts shown on
*Mapping Haitian History*, there are other important sites of historical
memory production, such as those at Merotte and in Arcahaie center that
celebrate Dessalines ripping the white band from the French tricolor and
its being sewn back together by Catherine Flon, or Pont Rouge, where a
statue by Moun Studio's Daniel Elie was recently placed at the site of
Dessalines's assassination. A significant challenge we face is in
acknowledging and integrating the growing wealth of digital work on the
history and memory of the Revolution without sacrificing the focus and
cohesiveness of our map project. 

We were particularly excited by some of the reviewer's specific
pedagogical suggestions. As a result, by 2021, we plan to feature on our
landing page a webinar on how to use the map site, and we plan to create
short videos for each map in the progression as part of its already
extant and separate short guide. In our classes, we have found
terminology to be particularly difficult for high school students,
especially around race, class, and legal status; thus we have added a
document on terminology and all documents are available as downloadable
PDFs.

We found particularly interesting the idea of offering suggestions on
varied approaches to both the topic and the site for different learners
and across disciplines. Currently, our senior interdisciplinary course
can count as an English or a history elective for our twelfth-grade
students, but this map is also intended to support tenth-grade students
in their one-term history elective on revolutions. We have added
supplementary handouts and assignments for each grade level. The map has
further application possibilities in, for example, language courses or
political science. *Mapping the Haitian Revolution* coursework currently
meets standards in two disciplines at our school, but we plan to link it
to Common Core standards so that it can be better integrated in US
public schools. If this map project is helpful beyond English-speaking
students, we would like to explore funding for translation work, which
would also expand the scope of possible linked resources. We welcome
feedback and suggestions for further improvement and would especially
appreciate examples of how the map is helpful in courses of any kind.

---

[^1]: \[Eds. note:\] The site was originally called *Haitian Revolution Axis Map* by our reviewer. As a result of this review, the site was renamed *Mapping the Haitian Revolution* (https://www.mappinghaitianrevolution.com/); To learn more, see the site authors' response, which follows the review.

[^2]: Stephanie Curci, a scholar of Haitian studies, is also the creator
    of *Mapping Haitian History*, an online visual records site for
    Haitian historical and cultural sites that contains images of forts
    throughout Haiti, many of which date back to the revolutionary
    period. See *Mapping Haitian History*,
    <http://www.mappinghaitianhistory.com/>.

[^3]: See *Fanm Rebèl*, https://www.fanmrebel.com/.

[^4]: See "Reading Suggestions," *Haitian History Blog*,
    https://haitianhistory.tumblr.com/readinglist.

[^5]: See ThingLink, https://www.thinglink.com/; and Timeline,
    https://timeline.knightlab.com/

[^6]: See *Slave Revolt in Jamaica*, http://revolt.axismaps.com/; the
    Tang Institute at Andover, https://tanginstitute.andover.edu/; and
    Axis Maps, https://www.axismaps.com/.

[^7]: See "Resources," *Mapping the Haitian Revolution*,
    https://www.mappinghaitianrevolution.com/resources.
