---
layout: article
section: articles
title: 
  "long": "Me, Myself, and Unno: Writing the Queer Caribbean Self into Digital Community"
  "short": "Me, Myself, and Unno"
doi: "https://doi.org/10.7916/archipelagos-mg7h-nf52"
author: 
- name: Kelly Baker Josephs
  shortname: Josephs
  bio: >
    Kelly Baker Josephs is a professor of English at York College, City University of New York, and a professor of English and digital humanities at the CUNY Graduate Center. She is the author of *Disturbers of the Peace: Representations of Insanity in Anglophone Caribbean Literature* (2013), the founder and former editor of *sx salon: a small axe literary platform*, and the manager of [*The Caribbean Commons*](http://caribbean.commons.gc.cuny.edu/) website.
date: December 2020
issue: 5
order: 3
abstract: >
  Caribbean autobiography in the mid-twentieth century grew as a method of combatting aporias in literary production and epistemological models, with novelists in particular writing themselves into visibility. But this tradition was predominantly male and decidedly heterosexual. Even as the Caribbean literary canon slowly diversified toward the end of the twentieth century with the inclusion of various life stories, the voices of queer writers remained at low volume, almost muted. This essay reads how those voices were enabled at the turn of the millennium by digital technologies. Reading digital versions of the personal narrative within the historical context of Caribbean autobiography, it examines the self-fashioning twenty-first-century Caribbean writers performed and published via the blogosphere. With particular focus on blogs by two Jamaican writers—Staceyann Chin and Marlon James—it argues that the form and technical features of blogging offered a safe space for queer Caribbean writers to "speak out" in ways that continued the tradition of Caribbean autobiography.
abstract_fr: >
  L'autobiographie caribbéenne au milieu du vingtième siècle est devenue une méthode pour combattre les apories de la production littéraire et des modèles épistémologiques, avec les romanciers en particulier s'écrivant dans la visibilité. Mais cette tradition était majoritairement masculine et décidément hétérosexuelle. Alors même que le canon littéraire des Caraïbes se diversifiait lentement vers la fin du vingtième siècle avec l'inclusion de diverses histoires de vie, les voix des écrivains queer demeuraient à faible volume, à peine audibles. Cet article lit comment ces voix ont été activées au tournant du millénaire par les technologies numériques. Par la lecture de versions numériques du récit personnel dans le context de l'autobiographie caribbéenne, il examine l'auto-façonnage effectué et publié par les écrivains caribbéens du XXIème siècle via la blogosphère. Se focalisant en particulier sur les blogs de deux écrivains jamaïquains---Staceyann Chin et Marlon James---il affirme que la forme et les caractéristiques techniques du blog ont offert un safe space aux écrivains queer des Caraïbes pour “parler haut et fort” de manière à continuer la tradition de l'autobiographie caribbéenne. 
abstract_es: >
  La autobiografía caribeña a mediados del siglo XX creció como un método para combatir las aporías en la producción literaria y los modelos epistemológicos, y los novelistas en particular se escribieron para hacerse visibles. Pero esta tradición era predominantemente masculina y decididamente heterosexual. A pesar de que el canon literario caribeño se diversificó lentamente hacia fines del siglo XX con la inclusión de varias historias de vida, las voces de los escritores cuirs se mantuvieron en un volumen bajo, casi en silencio. Este ensayo lee cómo esas voces fueron habilitadas en el cambio de milenio por las tecnologías digitales. Examinando versiones digitales de la narrativa personal dentro del contexto histórico de la autobiografía caribeña, este ensayo examina como ciertos autores caribeños del siglo XXI se auto-modelaron a través de publicaciones y actos interpretativos en la blogósfera. Con especial énfasis en los blogs de dos escritores jamaicanos, Staceyann Chin y Marlon James, argumenta que la forma y las características técnicas de los blogs ofrecieron un espacio seguro para que los escritores caribeños queer "hablaran" de manera que continuara la tradición de la autobiografía caribeña.
language: en
pdf: true
---


In two *New York Times* articles, published ten years apart, Staceyann
Chin and Marlon James tell deeply personal stories about their
experiences as queer Jamaican writers now living in the United States.
New York City, the star of both pieces, offered to both "sexiles" the
refuge and freedom intrinsic to the anonymity and individuality that was
potentially available far away from their homophobic and claustrophobic
homeland.[^1] Chin's 2004 piece declares, "No one cared if I kissed
girls," and James ends his 2015 piece with this observation: "Nobody
cared that my jeans had a nine-inch rise. I no longer looked over my
shoulder in the dark."[^2] The freedom these declarations imply is based
less on the isolation of the individual on a quest for independence than
on Chin's and James's (re)making of the self via the (re)making of
community. It is not that no one cared but that a curated constellation
of people cared differently. Chin's writing offered her a global stage
on which she could gain emotional and financial support by "teaching the
poetics of writing the self," and James similarly supported his sexile
by writing his "way out" of Jamaica. Though the narrative of these
published essays seems to be one of writing oneself away from the
rejecting homespace, Chin and James were also actively writing
themselves into a remembered Jamaica and a diasporic Caribbean. In these
essays, and in much of their other "writings of the self," they both
write their way into a Caribbeanness that their autobiographical
writings work to redefine as inclusive of nonheteronormative choices.

Writings of the self are not a new method of reshaping the contours of
what might be called "Caribbean." As Sandra Pouchet Paquet argues in her
pivotal 2002 study *Caribbean Autobiography: Cultural Identity and
Self-Representation*, there is an extensive history of life-writing in
the Caribbean literary canon that attempt such interventions via print
publications, beginning with early-nineteenth-century narratives such as
those by the Hart sisters of Antigua (Elizabeth Hart Twaites and Anne
Hart Gilbert) and *The History of Mary Prince, a West Indian Slave,
Related by Herself*. Paquet's argument elsewhere for the "centrality of
the personal narrative to the unfolding creative project that was
Caribbean literature" positions life-writing as foundational to the
building of the modern Caribbean canon.[^3] With this essay I hope to
expand the range of such narratives to include not only individual,
institutionally vetted essays like those published by Chin and James in
the *New York Times* but also digital writing, specifically posts from
personal blogs maintained by Caribbean writers. The autobiographical
narratives shared digitally by a number of Caribbean writers in the
early twenty-first century were a new, yet familiar, form of
life-writing.

Though blogs necessarily present and respond to forces different from
those we find in more formally crafted autobiographical narratives, they
nonetheless can be read as recent contributions to what Paquet names a
"contested literary space \[that forms\] the foundations or diverse
conceptions of individual and group identity" for Caribbean peoples.[^4]
In the mid-twentieth century, Caribbean autobiography grew as a method
of claiming ground in this "contested literary space." From George
Lamming's *In the Castle of My Skin* to Derek Walcott's *Another Life*,
Caribbean writers struggled to combat aporias in literary production and
epistemological models and write themselves into visibility from the
margins of colonial empires. But this tradition was predominantly male
and heterosexual. Even as questions of female sexual agency became more
central in autobiographical texts of the late twentieth century, these
questions were most often about what women did with cisgender men or
sometimes about what they did by themselves, but rarely were the
questions about what women did with other women or with noncisgender
men. Therefore, while the twentieth-century Caribbean literary canon
slowly became diversified with various life stories, the voices of queer
writers remained at low volume. In this essay, I examine how two
Jamaican writers in particular further diversified the Caribbean
autobiographical tradition at the turn of the century by centering
questions of queerness while experimenting with the formal and communal
affordances (and limitations) of blogging platforms.

"Positions of Enunciation"
--------------------------

{% include epigraph.html
    quote = "some magic boy named David<br>fixed the page<br>so now<br>I might write you love notes<br>more frequent than the drip drip drip<br>of mute hellos<br>hi world<br>here we go again"
    citation = "Staceyann Chin. \"Long Time…,\" <em>Cyberjournal</em>, 15 February 2006"
%}


The form of blogging—with its imagined audience(s), networked sites, and
nested comments—makes evident the tensions and interdependence inherent
in navigating individual and group identity. Traditional print
autobiographical works convey these tensions secondhand, but the
interactive nature of blogs lays such conflict and connectedness bare,
particularly when a blogger positions themself as speaking from or to a
specific community. In his 1990 essay "Cultural Identity and Diaspora,"
Stuart Hall writes,

> Practices of representation always implicate the positions from which
> we speak or write—the positions of *enunciation*. What recent theories
> of enunciation suggest is that, though we speak, so to say "in our own
> name," of ourselves and from our own experience, nevertheless who
> speaks, and the subject who is spoken of, are never identical, never
> exactly in the same place.[^6]

Hall provides language to think about the ways Caribbean bloggers a
decade later were involved in "practices of representation" that were
dependent on, and deeply dedicated to, the positions/places/people from
which they "enunciated" themselves into the World Wide Web. Because
their blog posts were self-consciously instituted practices of
self-representation, wherein the distance between the enunciated "I" and
the enunciating "I" was less mediated by editors and publishing
processes (and the lengths of time inherent in such processes) than in
traditionally published autobiographical narratives, the different
"places" of the subject and of the speaker were more closely aligned.
And the interactive format of blogging promised that the different
places of the speaker and the subject, *and* of their audiences, could
also be (or be made) more closely aligned.

This promise of unfixed positioning offered to the self-speaking subject
by early blogging platforms is a key difference between print and
digital autobiography, a key difference between most, if not all, print
and digital enunciations of the "I." From 2000 to 2010, particularly
toward the latter half of the decade, Caribbean writers of all kinds
began to turn to blogging to speak themselves into the digital universe
and to connect to established and potential audiences for their
nondigital writings. The work that blogs could (and still can) do for
such Caribbean "litbloggers" is varied.[^7] Blogs might serve the
function of "reaching out" to readers of one's published work to simply
make a connection; they might function to publicize work and
appearances; they might serve to grow create/grow an audience; they
might offer insight into an author's process. In the Caribbean
blogosphere, writers such as Tobias Buckell, Nalo Hopkinson, Nicholas
Laughlin, and Geoffrey Philp were relatively early adopters of the form,
embracing the advantages the internet offered for communication with
various audiences (including among themselves). Although their blogs
were arguably just as autobiographical as Chin's and James's, I narrowed
my corpus for this essay because I am particularly interested in how
queer Caribbean writers navigated the shifting terrain of digital
representation, of self-enunciation and audience. Additionally, the
timing of Chin's and James's blogs offers diverse perspectives of
digital autobiographical writing across the peak decade of Caribbean
blogging. Chin began her cyberjournal in 2001, which was earlier than
most of her Caribbean contemporaries, and ended in 2006; James began
blogging in 2006 and ended in 2009, when blogging as a whole became less
autobiographical (as more writers turned to Facebook and other social
media platforms designed specifically for self-representation).

While by the end of the 2000s writers might have questioned if anyone
was reading *their* blog, they did not question if anyone read blogs at
all or the legitimacy of blogging as a genre.[^8] Chin's early posts
indicate the pervasive uncertainty surrounding her entrance into what
was then a fairly new field of digital public self-disclosure. Her
choice of a cyberjournal instead of a titled blog is owed in large part
to her relatively early adoption of this form of communication.
According to Jill Walker Rettberg, while "the first online diaries
appeared around 1994," they were not yet called *blogs*:

> *Web log* at that time was used to refer to the statistics available
> to website administrators showing the number of visitors to a website.
> In 1997, Jorn Barger proposed that the term *weblog* be used to refer
> to websites that post links to interesting material with commentary….
> Posts in these early weblogs were brief, and although the comments
> usually had a clear individual voice and offered personal opinions,
> the content was usually comments on news stories and online finds
> rather than stories from the writer's life. Weblogs tended to be seen
> in opposition to online diaries, which were more confessional….
> \[But\] within a few years, the once quite separate genres of online
> diaries and blogs merged. Blog posts became longer and more
> essayistic, often using a more personal voice, and online diaries came
> to include more essayistic material and commentary in addition to the
> autobiographical content.[^9]

Chin's cyberjournal appeared amid the merging of online diaries and
political and cultural commentaries. Even as her posts slowed in
frequency after the first two years, she maintained her unique mix of
uncompromisingly mundane chronicle, large-scale polemic, and snippets of
draft poetry until the middle of the decade. This type of
life-writing—this public, almost immediate, seemingly unvetted by others
self-representation—allows for a slide into a perceived over-sharing.
However, insofar as Chin sometimes refers to multiple revisions of her
entries before posting (until mid-2002 she did not actually have the
ability to post the entries herself and had to send drafts to someone
with more technical knowledge for posting), we must consider her
intensely personal style purposeful.[^10]

Chin's entries chronicle her performance work, her travel and days off,
her time with lovers/family/friends, and her random interactions with
people she meets at colleges and the doctor's office. Threaded through
these seemingly inconsequential revelations are the quotidian
experiences of micro and macro aggressions against Caribbean queerness
and Chin's insistent claiming of her right to Jamaicanness, to Brooklyn,
and to something approaching "home." As with more polished, published
autobiographical narratives, Chin's cyberjournal imagines that the
details of her life represent a larger import for her readers.
Sometimes, however, the technicalities of web-writing, which were new to
her and had to be filtered through her webmaster's mysterious magic,
distanced her from her imagined audience. When shifting her posts to a
new site in early 2002, she temporarily lost the comments section of the
cyberjournal, and in several of her posts she questions whether anyone
is listening. On 3 March 2002, in her first post to the cyberjournal in
its new home, she writes, "I'm rambling because it feels like I'm
talking to a blank screen. I was more connected when people were
responding to stuff I was writing. Hopefully people will respond again
and then it won't be such a one-sided unorgasmic experience."[^11] The
comments section for her posts soon began to fill again, however, and
the pleasures of self-enunciation resumed.

Strategic Enunciations: What to Tell, and How
---------------------------------------------


{% include epigraph.html
    quote = "But so many of us have things that need to be said, and the Internet is the only place where those voices can be heard."
    citation = "Marlon James quoted in Laughlin, \"Talking to Jamaican Writer and
    Blogger Marlon James.\""
%}

{% include epigraph.html
    quote = "Such is the temperament of the technological crapshoot that frames our small lives."
    citation = "Staceyann Chin. \"May 21, 2002,\" <em>Cyberjournal</em>; printout in author's possession."
%}


In general, I have organized this essay around three questions of
digital self-enunciation: To whom do these writers speak? Of what do
they choose to (not) speak? And how do—how can—they speak? These
questions are about content as much as technology. Print capitalism
continues to shape digital publishing via the forms of creative
expression that can be recognized as such. Of course, capitalism in
general also affects digital writing through the limitations of
commercial digital spaces, which are often the spaces most available to
Caribbean writers in the region for digital expression. Discourse on
digital publishing often promotes the practice as freeing and enabling
for creative enterprise, but, as with the technologies of language and
print, digital communication also structures what can be said. In this
section, I turn to the what and the how of queer Jamaican
self-enunciation through the digital technologies and platforms popular
in the early twenty-first century.

What could be written of queer Caribbean selfhood on blogs of this time?
The answer is elusive, since it lies as much in what was not written as
in what was and could be written, both via the available technologies
and in a public space. For the "not written" we can look to a post's
comments, which might reveal silences and silencings by the blogger, or
to unmentioned events signaled as contemporary by the time/date stamps
built into most blog technologies. But even nondigital autobiographies
by queer Caribbean writers have had to contend with necessary silences
and the constraints of form in order to tell truths larger than an
individual life. Michelle Cliff's first book, *Claiming an Identity They
Taught Me to Despise*, is a collection of autobiographical writings
published in 1980 that weaves together myth, literature, and personal
history with a blend of prose and poetry. Cliff begins by declaring, "I
must make myself visible against my habitat," then immediately
acknowledges that "there exists a certain danger in peeling back."[^14]
Two years later Audre Lorde published *Zami: A New Spelling of My Name*,
naming her autobiographical *Künstlerroman* composed of
"dreams/myths/histories" a "biomythography."[^15] As lesbians of color,
even with the relative privilege of diasporic residency, both Cliff and
Lorde convey that "writing the self" requires formal experimentation and
generic promiscuity to safely tell and not-tell their stories, to speak
(to echo Stuart Hall) in their own name, of themselves and from their
own experience.

The act of writing—of writing about oneself especially—implies a level
of freedom enjoyed by the writer, even when that narrative might focus
on being unfree.[^16] Both Cliff and Lorde allude to this paradoxical
freedom to name their oppressions as shadowed by people and
circumstances they "can not yet afford to name."[^17] In digital spaces,
this freedom for Caribbean queer writers to tell is still noticeably
constrained by the need to not-tell. Marlon James began his blog, first
named *Croaking Marley*, in 2006, during his time as a graduate student
at Wilkes University in Pennsylvania. Beyond a September 2006 post
referring to his being on a student visa and in Pennsylvania, however,
he provides little information about his time at Wilkes. In his early
posts, he writes "our" and "we" primarily for Jamaicans and refers to
himself as a nonresident in America. While there are a few personal
details to be gleaned from his first posts—such as his turn to comics as
a kid ("I learned more about accepting my outsider status from X-men
than both the Bible and Notes From the Underground"[^18])—the
autobiographical nature of the blog is most visible in his discussions
of his work, his process of writing, and his work to become a writer.
Readers learn more about James the capital-W Writer than James the
person. That is, until about five months into the blog, in November
2006, when he suddenly gifts readers with the post "Where I'm Coming
From," which details two life-shaping moments for the young Marlon, in
primary and secondary school in Jamaica, and ends with the revelation of
a drastic decision:

> There was just no way I could continue like this, hated because I like
> art and lit and history, didn't like football (soccer) and walked and
> talked funny. I realized that more than everything, it must have been
> my screwed up way of speaking that made people hate me.
>
> So in the summer of 1987 I stopped speaking.[^19]

James's next blog post, published a week later, discusses writing sex
scenes in literary fiction: "When it comes to good explicit action the
gays guys seem to have it locked even if the straight audiences may not
want to read it."[^20] There's no mention of the revelation in the prior
post, making its last sentence about his refusal to speak a cliffhanger
of monstruous proportions. Perhaps the full stop after "stopped
speaking" is meant to reinforce the decision of the young Marlon. Yet
the adult Marlon does keep speaking, albeit about something else, in the
very next post. And that is one of the liberating affordances of the
nonlinear, post-based format of blogs. Continuity of narrative is
unnecessary, and positions of enunciation are unfixed. One can tell and
tell, and then not tell. One can simply "stop speaking," then begin
anew, elsewhere, in the next post.

In 2013–14, James returned to some of the material in "Where I'm Coming
From" for a vaguely fictional, second-person-perspective, thirteen-part
series of vignettes for the online literary publication *Revolver*,[^21]
and then again for his more-well-known 2015 essay "From Jamaica to
Minnesota to Myself" for the *New York Times Magazine*. The latter piece
is generally considered his official "coming out" essay, but the earlier
pieces evidence his experiments with strategic "positions of
enunciation" in individual blog posts as well as across the posts for
the four-year duration of the blog. Despite the backward chronology of
the blog format (especially for noncontemporary readers), our tendency
toward narrative often leads readers to perceive the individual posts as
part of a whole, stitching together congruent elements to cloak
irrelevant or even contradictory ones. In autobiography, we read for
what Lisa Lowe calls "a fluid story of a unitary \[author\]."[^22] The
technology that enables blogs makes it nearly impossible to read them as
fluid narratives; but readers nevertheless need to work against the
impulse to suture posts if they seek the stories told by the gaps,
paradoxes, and silences. The writers themselves often aim to present a
unitary subject in their blogs, repeating anecdotes and referring to
previous posts to weave together a composite but coherent identity.
James's reworking of material from his blog, first to the *Revolver*
series and then to the *New York Times* *Magazine* essay, forces us to
pay closer attention to how he leveraged the blog format to tell (and to
not-tell) as he worked out how he wanted to form this autobiographical
narrative into a fluid story.[^23]

Chin also reworks material from her cyberjournal entries for later
performances and publications, including her 2009 memoir, *The Other
Side of Paradise*, which crafts into a linear narrative several of the
stories she had previously told via her blog, her poetry, and her
one-woman shows.[^24] Her navigation of various positions of enunciation
becomes obvious as the same stories are retold and refashioned. More
supple than James's reworking of his stories of silence and subterfuge
for *Revolver* and later the *New York Times*, Chin's autobiographical
narratives are revised across genres and reordered several times. In the
(cyber)space of her cyberjournal, which allowed for polemic, poetry,
dramatic monologue, and asynchronous dialogue with readers, Chin could
endlessly "remix" her writing choices and, as Jeannine Murray-Román
argues, was able to "amplify" the stories of self she wished to
tell.[^25] Within the reach and technological limits of their chosen
platforms, queer Caribbean bloggers like Chin and James can manipulate
circulation of their writings of the self—revealing, remixing,
amplifying, and suppressing—in ways unavailable to earlier writers such
as Michelle Cliff and Audre Lorde.

There remains, however, a drive toward print publication evident in the
blogs of this period. Although they were less constrained by the printed
page and the order it entails, bloggers like Chin and James, who
imagined themselves in a literary lineage with canonical (Caribbean)
writers, had to make for themselves the prestige that the printed page
(and selection by the hands of print capitalism) grants to published
writers. Consequently, in their blog posts, Chin and James position not
only their personal experiences but the very labor of writing as what
individualizes them, makes them special, and makes their lives
representative of worthy (Caribbean and/or queer) lives. For both Chin
and James, the labor of writing, both on and off their blogs, became one
of the themes that threaded the varied posts together. Whether in
celebration or vulnerable self-questioning, whether as an aside or as
the focus of a full post, it is the *work* of writing that they most
often reveal as they express their struggles with their chosen art forms
and with the industries they must contend with to become capital-W
Writers. This focus on the labor of writing also becomes one of the
threads that connect them with their audience and with other writers of
the time experimenting with the affordances of digital platforms.

Navigating Digital Networks
---------------------------

Nicholas Laughlin's 2006 *Global Voices* post titled "11 Key Moments in
\[Anglo-\] Caribbean Blog History" provides an overview of how Caribbean
bloggers in the 2000s took themselves seriously as a network and took
blogging seriously as a genre.[^26] Being a part of this networked crew
meant linking to other blogs. It meant celebrating when you or your
colleagues were mentioned elsewhere on the net or in print; it meant
watching for "spikes" in traffic and perhaps pandering to these spikes.
Overall, it was the Caribbean reading the Caribbean writing in a
technologically new way.[^27] Much of that is lost now, for multiple
reasons, including, as mentioned above, writers revising their digital
selves. The rise of social media platforms such as Facebook, Twitter,
and Instagram has contributed to the decline of Caribbean blogging. In
different ways, each of these platforms has become a site for
"microblogging," where one can present open-ended (and endlessly open to
comment) snippets of one's life. And where the more one writes, the
faster one's past posts disappear down the timeline, a timeport of
"supermodernity."[^28] The ease of posting to such social media spaces,
versus crafting and publishing a blog post, and the near-instant rewards
of social media likes and comments (themselves also often easier to
enact than blog commentary) have, understandably, made the work of
blogging less attractive. Many of the bloggers Laughlin mentions in his
*Global Voices* overview no longer maintain their sites or have slowed
their posting activity considerably.

The blog posts and corresponding comments that remain available to us
today are evidence of the active network of Caribbean bloggers that
existed before the decline in the 2010s. Some of James's posts reference
Laughlin, Geoffrey Philp, or Annie Paul as inspirations (or instigators)
for the content, particularly for lists or challenges such as in "Five
Note Mojo" and "Five Songs I Must Have on My i-Pod."[^29] Although Chin,
blogging as she did earlier in the decade, was somewhat outside this
particular network, the comments on her cyberjournal and her own use of
hyperlinks indicate that she was similarly navigating an online
community.[^30] James had been very much entrenched in a more Caribbean
digital network. Even the beginning of his personal blog seems to have
stemmed from a playful taunt by Laughlin in his 2006 *Global Voices*
post "West Indian Literature Online." When listing current bloggers in
the "small, vibrant, and growing literary sector in the Caribbean
blogosphere," Laughlin prodded: "And maybe Marlon James—whose first
novel, *John Crow's Devil*, was nominated for both a Commonwealth
Writers' Prize and a Los Angeles Times Book Prize—will start a ‘real'
blog one of these days—meanwhile, he's been keeping a so­called ‘plog'
over at Amazon.com, where he's been writing about, among other things,
Jean Rhys and literacy in Jamaica."[^31] On 29 May, James commented on
Laughlin's post: "Alright! Alright! Damn it! I will set up my blog and
stop with this ‘plogging' business right away." And the first post on
his personal blog is dated 30 May. From posts and comments like these—on
sites such as *Global Voices* as well as on popular personal blogs such
as Annie Paul's *Active Voice* and Geoffrey Philp's blog—we can trace
the ways this Caribbean digital network shaped many of the blog posts
published.[^32] Reading across blog posts and comments, we become privy
to some of the workings of these networked influences: the conversations
that were public but hidden in the comments section and those that were
conducted privately via emails and face-to-face dialogues but then
hinted at in comment threads. These exchanges are articulated into the
blog posts that are eventually crafted for the public, representing
individuals navigating a community of digital and nondigital encounters
as they write themselves into subjectivity. Even as the size and very
existence of an audience may be questioned, this blogging constitutes a
writing against invisibility and into community.

Paradoxically, it is this community that also works against strategic
invisibility. Deletion, whether deliberate or accidental, is never
guaranteed to be complete when there are so many potential avenues of
reference to the deleted material. As it is, what remains available from
the blogs of this time indicates that even in focusing on only Chin and
James, I am working with not just a partial but a palimpsestic and
changeable archive of revised and in-progress autobiography, an archive
constructed of simultaneously too much and too little material. Much of
the material is no longer available because older portions of blogs, or
in some cases entire sites for them, have been neglected or removed by
the authors as they progressed to other platforms and to other selves.
And the material we do have some access to can be overwhelming in scope
(neither Chin nor James are known for their reticence or brevity).
Still, less than fifteen years after Chin closed her cyberjournal, and
ten years after James stopped posting on his blog, there is significant
and traceable evidence of what might be considered archival loss.
Although I have a sizeable portion of Chin's early cyberjournal entries
saved in hard copy, and the Internet Archive provides additional access
through 2006, the blog is no longer available on her website. When I
began this project, I felt an urgency to capture James's 2006–9 blog
before he decided it was not in keeping with his post–Booker Prize self,
but I later learned that sometime between 2007 and 2010 he had already
significantly revamped the blog to reflect his post–*Night Women* self.
Such archival gaps are often strategic, and in many ways they are built
into each author's initial technological choices: James used BlogSpot,
which allows for (his) deletion of all comments; and Chin's site was
built on Adobe Flash technology that is no longer supported online. In a
2003 interview I conducted with Chin, she revealed, "The kind of
half-poems that exist in my journal never go anywhere else. There are no
copies of them anywhere else. If my website crashes…that's it."[^33] Of
course, that never really is "it" when one participates in digital
community, but the threat and allure of deletion remain integral parts
of writing the self online. Revision and deletion, the opportunity to
take back information—inasmuch as one can take back anything from the
internet—offers a blogging safety net. This is particularly important
for writers like Chin, who occupy vulnerable social and professional
positions: black, female, migrant, queer, un(der)published,
un(der)employed.

Now, almost two decades after Chin began her cyberjournal, internet
users are more familiar with this paradox of the permanent-but-ephemeral
archive of digital writing.[^34] But what did digital permanence mean
for bloggers when the genre was relatively new and search engines were
limited? For this reason, I have been selective in my use of materials
from Chin's and James's digital writings. I recognize that my own
archiving of posts that were perhaps created with ephemerality in mind
may be counter to the safety net that I argue blogging provided in those
early years. At the same time, I want to convey the spirit of this
moment and the positions and possibilities of enunciation blogging
offered queer Caribbean writers with access to digital platforms. When I
asked Chin in 2003 why she chose to start sharing her life online, she
responded,

> A lot of white straight history is allowed into the canon. Even the
> idea of the canon is very white and straight and I feel like the web
> gives us the place where we can write our own histories. Whether
> they're relevant or irrelevant. I don't send out emails to people with
> my cyberjournal entries in them; I chose not to do that for a reason.
> So it is only the ones who want to come. And that's what I like about
> it.
>
> The net gives you a way to grow maybe longer and wider fingers.[^35]

Reaching with these longer and wider fingers for what audience may come,
Chin and James equivocally thrust their stories of self into the public
domain. Frequently expressing doubt about the venture, they nevertheless
continued to write themselves, pushing against canonical expectations
while creating digital space for others in a collective of Caribbean
voices. As Sandra Pouchet Paquet writes, "Self-focus enhances rather
than diminishes authority; it serves to establish the author's
credibility in a cultural space of his own creation."[^36] With their
self-focused writings, Chin and James propelled themselves into a
literary tradition while also wrestling with the myopia of that
tradition. Taking advantage of turn-of-the-twenty-first-century
technologies that promised freedom even as they withheld ultimate
control, Chin and James insisted on the relevance and credibility of
queer and Caribbean and queer Caribbean lives. In this place where they
could write their own histories, they created and deleted, reproduced
and revised, refusing to let their self-narratives be fixed.

Acknowledgements
----------------

Endless gratitude to Nicholas Laughlin, without whose generosity, then
and now, I could not have written this essay. I am also indebted to the
following people for their critical readings of various early drafts:
Matthew Chin, Ronald Cummings, Tzarina T. Prater, and the editors and
anonymous peer reviewers for *archipelagos*.

---

[^1]: Manuel Guzmán is credited with coining *sexile* to describe
    exclusion, or exile, from a home community because of an
    individual's sexual orientation. The term has been further explored
    and expanded by Yolanda Martínez-San Miguel, and Jeannine
    Murray-Román has applied it directly to Staceyann Chin. See Manuel
    Guzmán, "*Pa' la escuelita con mucho cuida'o y por la orillita*: A
    Journey through the Contested Terrains of the Nation and Sexual
    Orientation," *Puerto Rican Jam: Rethinking Colonialism and
    Nationalism*, ed. Frances Negrón-Muntaner and Ramón Grosfoguel
    (Minneapolis: University of Minnesota Press, 1997), 209–28; Yolanda
    Martínez-San Miguel, "Female Sexiles? Toward an Archeology of
    Displacement of Sexual Minorities in the Caribbean," *Signs* 36, no.
    4 (2011): 813–36; and Jeannine Murray-Román, "Staceyann Chin and Zoe
    Valdés: Sexilic Politics in the Blogosphere," chap. 4 in
    *Performance and Personhood in Caribbean Literature: From Alexis to
    the Digital Age* (Charlottesville: University of Virginia Press,
    2016).

[^2]: See Staceyann Chin, "No One Cared if I Kissed Girls," *New York
    Times*, 21 November 2004,
    <https://www.nytimes.com/2004/11/21/nyregion/thecity/no-one-cared-if-i-kissed-girls.html>;
    and Marlon James, "From Jamaica to Minnesota to Myself," *New* *York
    Times Magazine*, 10 March 2015,
    <https://www.nytimes.com/2015/03/15/magazine/from-jamaica-to-minnesota-to-myself.html>.

[^3]: Sandra Pouchet Paquet, "On Caribbean Autobiographies," *Anthurium*
    10, no. 2 (2013): 2, <http://doi.org/10.33596/anth.231>.

[^4]: Sandra Pouchet Paquet, *Caribbean Autobiography:* *Cultural
    Identity and Self-Representation* (Madison; University of Wisconsin
    Press, 2002), 261.

[^6]: Stuart Hall, "Cultural Identity and Diaspora," in *Identity:
    Community, Culture, Difference*, ed. Jonathan Rutherford (London:
    Lawrence and Wishart, 1990), 222. Hall published an earlier version
    of his essay in 1989 as "Cultural Identity and Cinematic
    Representation," based on a talk he gave in 1988. As the revised
    title indicates, in the version I quote here, Hall has shifted his
    focus a bit more toward diasporic identity formation.

[^7]: I take the term *litbloggers* from Nicholas Laughlin's interview
    series with Caribbean bloggers on *Global Voices*. The series begins
    with "Talking to Jamaican Litblogger Geoffrey Philp" on 14 May 2007,
    <https://globalvoices.org/2007/05/14/talking-to-jamaican-litblogger-geoffrey-philp>.
    Several of the interviewed writers discuss why they turn to blogging
    and what it offers separate from, and in connection to, their
    nondigital writings.

[^8]: When asked in an interview with Nicholas Laughlin if he felt his
    blog had "widened the audience for \[his\] fiction," James
    responded, "I'm not even sure that people read what I write." But
    shortly before that he also reveals, "My friend Don Lee is convinced
    that my blog persona is a completely different person. A creative
    writing teacher told me once that my literary persona is a far
    better writer. At one point there were people who knew me as a
    blogger, and nothing else." Nicholas Laughlin, "Talking to Jamaican
    Writer and Blogger Marlon James," *Global Voices*, 8 May 2009,
    2009, <https://globalvoices.org/2009/05/08/talking-to-jamaican-writer-and-blogger-marlon-james>.

[^9]: Jill Walker Rettberg, "Online Diaries and Blogs," in *The Diary:
    The Epic of Everyday Life*, ed. Batsheva Ben-Amos and Dan Ben-Amos
    (Bloomington: Indiana University Press, 2020), 412–13.

[^10]: In her 31 March 2002 entry, Chin refers to a spoof of her site
    that parodies her intimate, diaristic style of blog writing and her
    centering of her sexuality in those writings. Textual clues on
    Chin's and others' blogs indicate this parody was done by Peter Dean
    Rickards, a Jamaican photographer who ran the popular website
    *Afflicted Yard* (I have not, however, been able to find the parody
    itself online).

[^11]: Staceyann Chin, "March 03, 2002," *Cyberjournal*; printout in
    author's possession.


[^14]: Michelle Cliff, *Claiming an Identity They Taught Me to Despise*
    (Watertown, MA: Persephone, 1980), 3.

[^15]: Audre Lorde, acknowledgments to *Zami: A New Spelling of My Name*
    (Berkeley, CA: Crossing, 1982), n.p. Lorde's "biomythography" had
    originally been published in 1982 by Persephone Press, which had
    also published Cliff's *Claiming an Identity*. I note this as
    potential evidence of the difficulties queer writers of color may
    have had in gaining, and maintaining, access to publishing their
    stories. Persephone was a small independent press specializing in
    feminist and lesbian books. The press was short-lived (1976–83) and,
    after publishing fourteen titles, folded because of financial
    troubles. In a 1983 interview, Lorde spoke of having to pay for the
    rights to republish *Zami* and criticized Persephone for their
    treatment of women writers of color. See Karla Jay, "Speaking the
    Unspeakable: Poet Audre Lorde," in Audre Lorde, *Conversations with
    Audre Lorde*, ed. Joan Wylie Hall (Jackson: University Press of
    Mississippi, 2004), 111; originally published in *Gay News*
    (Philadelphia), 15 March 1984.

[^16]: I am thinking here of Lisa Lowe's categorization of autobiography
    as a "genre of liberty." In her reading of *The Interesting
    Narrative of the Life of Olaudah Equiano, or Gustavus Vassa, the
    African*, Lowe argues, "The intense social value accorded the
    autobiographical genre illustrates how liberal emancipation required
    a literary narrative of the self-authoring autonomous individual to
    be distilled out of the heteronomous collective subjectivity of
    colonial slavery." Autobiography, then, raises the narrative subject
    (and therefore the writer) above the very conditions that make for
    the content and potential import of the narrative. Lisa Lowe, *The
    Intimacies of Four Continents* (Durham, NC: Duke University Press,
    2015), 2, 47.

[^17]: Lorde, acknowledgments.

[^18]: Marlon James, "On X-Men 3," *Marlon James: Among Other Things…*
    (blog), 10 June 2006,
    <http://marlon-james.blogspot.com/2006/06/on-x-men-3.html>.

[^19]: Marlon James, "Where I'm Coming From," *Marlon James: Among Other
    Things…*, 27 November 2006,
    <http://marlon-james.blogspot.com/2006/11/where-im-coming-from.html>.

[^20]: Marlon James, "Spacebreak Sex," *Marlon James: Among Other
    Things…*, 4 December 2006,
    <http://marlon-james.blogspot.com/2006/12/spacebreak-sex.html>.

[^21]: The project begins with "Part 1: Cop a Feel for All Your Sins,"
    on 13 May 2013, and continues through to "Part 13: You're Now about
    to Witness the Strength of Street Knowledge," on 7 August 2014.
    *Revolver* was a digital publication produced by a literary arts
    organization based in Lowertown, St. Paul. See
    <http://www.around-around.com/the-regulars/marlon-james/> for all
    thirteen pieces.

[^22]: Lowe, *Intimacies of Four Continents*, 50.

[^23]: In the *Global Voices* interview, Nicholas Laughlin asks James,
    "How is writing for your blog different to, say, writing a short
    essay for a print publication?" James responds, "My blog posts are
    very much searches, me writing towards finding what I really want to
    say. For some reason that feels more natural in a blog format, the
    act of getting my s\*\*t together. In print, my post about ‘The
    Bigots On My Bookshelf' would seem unformed and slightly
    inconclusive, but online it seems like what it is, my going through
    a process." Laughlin, "Talking to Jamaican Writer and Blogger Marlon
    James."

[^24]: See Staceyann Chin, *The Other Side of Paradise: A Memoir* (New
    York: Scribner, 2009).

[^25]: See Murray-Román, "Staceyann Chin and Zoe Valdés."

[^26]: Nicholas Laughlin, "11 Key Moments in \[Anglo-\]Caribbean Blog
    History," *Global Voices*, 13 January 2006,
    <https://globalvoices.org/2006/01/13/11-key-moments-in-anglo-caribbean-blog-history>.

[^27]: I present some of these ideas about a network of bloggers in a
    more detailed discussion of the Caribbean blogosphere in my
    forthcoming "Digital Yards: Caribbean Narrative on Social Media and
    Other Digital Platforms," in *Caribbean Literature in Transition*,
    vol. 3, *1970–2020*, ed. Ronald Cummings and Alison Donnell
    (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, forthcoming).

[^28]: "The term supermodernity (*surmodernité*)," writes A.
    González-Ruibal, "was coined by French Anthropologist Marc Augé in
    1992 to define the period commonly known as late modernity. The
    usefulness of the concept of supermodernity, as compared to other
    definitions of the later part of modernity, rests on two things: the
    idea of exaggeration and the retention of the concept of modernity.
    Regarding the first point, Augé talks of three excesses: factual
    overabundance (which is associated with an acceleration of
    historical time), spatial overabundance (the abolishing of distance
    by electronic media and transportation), and an excess of
    self-reflexive individuality." A. González-Ruibal, "Supermodernity
    and Archaeology," in *Encyclopaedia of Global Archaeology*, ed. C.
    Smith (New York: Springer, 2014), 7125.

[^29]: See Marlon James, "Five Note Mojo," *Marlon James: Among Other
    Things…*, 11 February 2007,
    <http://marlon-james.blogspot.com/2007/02/five-note-mojo.html>; and
    "Five Songs I Must Have on My i-Pod," *Marlon James: Among Other
    Things…*, 13 March 2008,
    <http://marlon-james.blogspot.com/2008/03/five-songs-i-must-have-on-my-i-pod.html>.
    There are currently no comments visible on James's blog, but the
    content of some posts indicates that they were open to comments at
    the time, and some of these comments are available on Internet
    Archive captures of the site.

[^30]: See Murray-Román, "Staceyann Chin and Zoe Valdés," for more on
    Chin's usage of hyperlinks in her blog.

[^31]: See Nicholas Laughlin, "West Indian Literature Online," *Global
    Voices*, 28 April 2006,
    2006, <https://globalvoices.org/2006/04/28/west-indian-literature-online>.

[^32]: See Annie Paul, *Active Voice* (blog), <https://anniepaul.net>;
    and Geoffrey Philp, <https://geoffreyphilp.blogspot.com>.

[^33]: Kelly Baker Josephs, "Ventriloquising the Caribbean: Interview
    with Staceyann Chin," *Jamaica Journal* 30, no. 3 (2007): 31.

[^34]: I am thinking here of Sonya Donaldson's forthcoming essay "The
    Ephemeral Archive." But with autobiographical blogs, particularly
    queer Caribbean blogs, as I note later in the paragraph I am uneasy
    with the "degree of vigilance and labor" that Donaldson recommends
    as archival practice, in the form of "careful annotation,
    screenshotting, downloading, storage and backup." See Sonya
    Donaldson, "The Ephemeral Archive: Unstable Terrain in Times and
    Sites of Discord," in *The Digital Black Atlantic*, ed. Roopika
    Risam and Kelly Baker Josephs (Minneapolis: University of Minnesota
    Press, forthcoming).

[^35]: Josephs, "Ventriloquising the Caribbean," 31.

[^36]: Paquet, *Caribbean Autobiography*, 137.
