---
layout: article
section: articles
title: 
  "long": "Data is patrimony: on developing a decolonial model for access and repatriation of sociolinguistic data"
  "short": "Data is patrimony"
doi: "https://doi.org/10.7916/archipelagos-n3pb-rx95"
author: 
- name: Nicté Fuller Medina
  shortname: Fuller Medina
  bio: >
    Nicté Fuller Medina (PhD, University of Ottawa) is a quantitative linguist. She studies the mechanisms underlying multilingual speech to both inform linguistic science and to challenge narratives of deficiency with respect to racialized language varieties. She leads two on-going projects: *The Language Contact in Belize* project which examines Spanish-Kriol-English contact and *Language, Culture and History: Belize in a Digital Age* which focuses on the creation of digital corpora and repatriation of legacy sociolinguistic data within a decolonial framework. Her most recent publications appear in the volume *When Creole and Spanish Collide: Language and Cultural Contact in the Caribbean* and in the *Canadian Journal of Linguistics*. She is an insider/outsider researcher, a Belizeanist, Central Americanist and Caribbeanist.
date: May 2022
issue: 6
order: 8
abstract: >
  This paper discusses the first dataset installment of the project, Language, Culture and History: Belize in a Digital Age, which focusses on the recovery, preservation and repatriation of legacy sociolinguistic data to Belize. This first dataset, the Older Recordings of Belizean varieties of Spanish, are a collection of sociolinguistic interviews carried out in the late 70s in Mestizo-Maya communities. These interviews are a record of language as it was used at an earlier time as well as narratives of community folklore and cultural beliefs. Re-imagining these data as cultural patrimony and adopting a decolonial framework, this paper describes the intentional steps taken to disrupt the extractivism typical of both memory institutions and linguistics research. These steps include restitution and repatriation, local access, capacity building and challenging Western views of ownership and knowledge production. In sum, it centers communities at both the local and regional level which includes the choice to archive (and eventually make public) the collection via dLOC, a known entity in Belize and the region, allowing for a broader virtual and symbolic repatriation to the region. 
abstract_fr: >
  Cet article traite du premier volet de la base de données du projet "Language, Culture and History: Belize in a Digital Age," qui se concentre sur la récupération, la préservation et le rapatriement des données sociolinguistiques patrimoniales au Belize. Ce premier ensemble de données, les Older Recordings of Belizean variétés of Spanish, est une collection d'entretiens sociolinguistiques réalisés à la fin des années 70 dans les communautés métisses-Mayas. Ces entretiens sont un enregistrement de la langue telle qu'elle était utilisée à une époque antérieure ainsi que des récits du folklore communautaire et des croyances culturelles. En réimaginant ces données en tant que patrimoine culturel et en adoptant un cadre décolonial, cet article décrit les mesures intentionnelles prises pour perturber l'extractivisme typique des institutions de la mémoire et de la recherche linguistique. Ces étapes comprennent la restitution et le rapatriement, l'accès local, le renforcement des capacités et la remise en question des conceptions occidentales de la propriété et de la production de connaissances. En somme, le centrage des communautés au niveau local et régional qui inclut le choix d'archiver (et éventuellement de rendre public) la collection via dLOC, une entité connue au Belize et dans la région, permettant un rapatriement virtuel et symbolique plus large dans la région.  
abstract_es: >
  Este ensayo analiza la primera entrega del conjunto de datos del proyecto, "Idioma, cultura e historia: Belice en la era digital," que se centra en la recuperación, preservación y repatriación de datos sociolingüísticos heredados a Belice. Este primer conjunto de datos, las Grabaciones más antiguas de las variedades beliceñas del español, son una colección de entrevistas sociolingüísticas realizadas a finales de los 70 en comunidades mestizas-mayas. Estas entrevistas son un registro del lenguaje tal como se usaba en una época anterior, así como narraciones del folclore comunitario y las creencias culturales. Reimaginando estos datos como patrimonio cultural y adoptando un marco decolonial, este artículo describe los pasos intencionales tomados para interrumpir el extractivismo típico, tanto de las instituciones de la memoria como de la investigación lingüística. Estos pasos incluyen la restitución y la repatriación, el acceso local, el desarrollo de capacidades y el cuestionamiento de las opiniones occidentales sobre la propiedad y la producción de conocimientos. En resumen, centra a las comunidades tanto a nivel local como regional, lo que incluye la opción de archivar (y eventualmente hacer pública) la colección a través de dLOC, una entidad conocida en Belice y la región, lo que permite una repatriación virtual y simbólica más amplia a la región. 
language: en
pdf: true
---

"I know the world by how I speak the world": TikTok ABCs, Disaster
Language, and Andrew Salkey\'s *Hurricane*

The "Trini Alphabet Series" was a Caribbean social media sensation
created in 2020 by Stephon Felmine (@stephon23). In this series of
videos, Felmine assumes the role of a teacher rehearsing the ABCs for
fictive schoolchildren. With ruler in hand and an authoritative thwack
to grab your attention, Felmine introduces the letter of the day at the
start of each video and offers a single word whose meaning he then
clarifies with one or two inventive examples. Notable in his ability to
cherry-pick loaded local lingo not typically invoked for pedagogy,
Felmine offers selections like "L is for Lickrish" and "M is for
Mamaguy" so that viewers are immediately primed for guffaws, but
Felmine\'s expressive articulation and practiced schoolteacher mien are
what sell his skits.[^1] "B is for Braggadang," Felmine says earnestly
in the second video of this series before clarifying, "Braggadang means
old or in a state of disrepair. For example, my neighbour making a whole
set of ole noise with he braggadang car."[^2] Felmine manages to
maintain accuracy in his definitions and examples, conjuring plausible
but comical scenes and only slightly exaggerating local speech rhythms.
His intonation and pacing are skillful such that nuances of minor
expressions like "eh-heh" (in the video "E is for Eh-heh") are
recognizable.[^3]

Felmine's performances and their popularity engage the processes whereby
languages are (de)legitimized and bring to mind the many Caribbean
writers who have long explored these processes. In *The Cartographer
Tries to Map a Way to Zion*, for instance, the poet Kei Miller
juxtaposes the formal English and scientific method of a cartographer
with the language and philosophy of a Rastaman.[^4] Miller explains,
"The whole book is interested obviously in maps and cartography and the
things that maps miss, but in a larger sense it's interested in
language."[^5] Miller's poetry suggests that understanding why certain
ways of speaking have been marginalized and others naturalized involves
investigating not just histories of inclusions and exclusions, but also
occlusions. Referring to Sam Selvon's novel *The Lonely Londoners* and
how its use of Caribbean ways of speaking "renders London in a new
language," Miller emphasizes, "I know the world by how I speak the
world."[^6] The languages employed in any place can inhibit, just as
they can transform, our knowing; the dissonance that comes from their
juxtaposition can be revelatory.

The work of Selvon and his contemporaries as well as the more recent
contributions of writers like Miller explore the epistemologies embedded
in Caribbean vernacular.[^7] Felmine is a beneficiary of these writers,
but he also satisfies an appetite on social media for cultural
showcases. On TikTok, for instance, a variety of users attract views and
followers by offering introductions to language that are specific to
their cultures, communities, or nations. An established celebrity like
Sean Paul (@duttypaul) seeks to maintain the brand he has established
through his music by creating TikTok videos that explain Jamaican
English. In one post titled "Jamaican Lingo Pt. 1," he loosely defines
"big up" and includes the hashtags #jamaicanlingo #patois #patwa
#howtochatjamaican.[^8] Paul simplifies Jamaican English to basic
vocabulary and positions himself as a figure of linguistic authority who
grants his followers access to fluency. Likewise, less established users
turn to this trend in an effort to build their following. An aspiring
rapper named Tenn Buick (@tennbuick), for instance, offers a multi-part
series called the "Hindi/Guyanese Creole Challenge" that features him
and his partner comparing words from their respective communities in
quick succession.[^9] Covering multiple words per video, they offer
little explanation or commentary, such that the exclusivity of the
comparison appears to be the main appeal.

This pattern of performances prompts this article's consideration of how
Caribbean speech maps onto the digital landscape. I begin by analyzing
Felmine's TikTok series, which centers Trinidadian English, alongside
its predecessor, a TikTok series by Kwame 'Wello' Simpson (@wellonyc),
which centers Guyanese English. Acknowledging the use of irony in these
videos, I interrogate the affordances of the TikTok form and question
easy assumptions that such videos might effectively disrupt colonial and
imperial linguistic hierarchies. Moreover, I suggest that usages of
Caribbean vernacular on social media accumulate connotations of
funniness. The term "funniness" aims to capture their likelihood of
registering as innocuously entertaining and/or being cast as outside of
serious inquiry. I unpack the implications of these connotations by
turning to the testimony of a survivor of the 2021 eruption of La
Soufrière in St. Vincent and the reactions on Facebook to the survivor's
use of St. Vincentian English. Pairing that testimony with Andrew
Salkey's 1964 novel *Hurricane*, I argue that funniness risks
compromising the opportunities for ideological inspection that fictional
and non-fictional representations of disaster make possible. The
inclusion of Salkey reiterates my underlying claim in this paper that
Caribbean literature offers analytical provocations that usefully serve
the study of social media usage in the Caribbean.

## Caribbean TikTok 

{% include image.html
    img="Felmine.jpg"
    title="Trini Alphabet Series @stephon23"
    caption="A is for Ah."
    url="https://web.archive.org/web/20210517152122/https://www.tiktok.com/@stephon23/video/6876192861981805825"
%}

{% include image.html
    img="Simpson.jpg"
    title="@wellonyc"
    caption="Arinj."
    url="https://web.archive.org/web/20210517150915/https://www.tiktok.com/@wellonyc/video/6829872495324155142"
%}

Felmine copied the structure of his skits from Simpson, who also goes by
Ragga Rebel.[^10] Hailing from Guyana and now based in New York, Simpson
also teaches his ABCs on TikTok but with the words and enunciations
circulating in Guyana, as in "A is for Arinj."[^11] He uses background
images, costumes, and props more readily than Felmine, drawing on his
theater training.[^12] While the delight derived from both Felmine's and
Simpson's performances includes recognition (we really does talk like
that) and pride (only we could talk like that), the humor in both
primarily hinges on appreciation of how the classroom setting and the
performer's seriousness are inconsistent with what is usually perceived
as informal or indecorous language. The defining similarity, then, is
that while both sets of performances are overtly expositive in tone,
neither prioritizes explaining these words to cultural outsiders.
Instead, they work with irony, depending as they do on an audience\'s
familiarity with, and alertness to, context.

This dynamic between performer and audience on a social media platform
can be better understood through reference to Trevor Boffone's
*Renegades*. Analyzing how Generation Z uses dance and hip hop to
fashion their identities in the United States, Boffone argues that
"\[d\]igital spaces such as Dubsmash and TikTok allow Zoomers\-\--and
especially teens of color\-\--to produce cultural content that, in turn,
facilitates young people's participation in an increasingly inclusive
and democratized media culture."[^13] Given the capacity of these apps
to launch users into widespread visibility and notwithstanding the
prevalence of anti-Black racism and cultural appropriation on these
apps, Boffone claims that these spaces allow young people to "construct
their digital personas and performances in such a way as to signal a
powerful future in which community is the focus and previously
marginalized identities are the mainstream."[^14] He firmly believes
that sharing, learning, celebrating, and collaborating on dance
performances "can be used as a strategy to bring the audience in and
help them identify with a collective culture."[^15] Boffone considers
which digital spaces maximize this potential for community building in
the United States, suggesting what might be at work via TikTok
performances in the Caribbean. Moreover, Boffone argues for the capacity
for such spaces to disrupt and transform stubborn systems of bias: "By
foregrounding Dubsmash as a fundamental part of my pedagogy, obligation
to each other instead became a way for my students and me to trouble the
traditional hierarchies and relationships seen in urban public
education."[^16]

Given that Felmine's and Simpson's performances center jokes rather than
dances, I also turn to "SRSLY?? A Typology of Online Ironic Markers" by
Noam Gal, Zohar Kampf, and Limor Shifman, a study of ironic humor on
social media.[^17] It focuses on the Israeli socio-political context and
Facebook----though posts on Twitter, Tumblr, Reddit, and Instagram are
also considered----to argue that although irony in both digital and
non-digital spaces depends on "an intended amusing gap between the meant
and the said," nevertheless decoding irony in "the networked,
fragmented, and hyperlinked arena of social media" often functions
differently.[^18] Their analysis "yielded a classification of five
domains of ironic marking: platform, participants, linguistic style,
intra-textual elements, and contextual knowledge."[^19] On the one hand,
absence of contextual knowledge or lack of familiarity with an
individual's personal style of expression can compromise another user's
ability to detect irony. On the other hand, the social media profile,
the use of hashtags and emojis, comments from other viewers, or the
specific group or page to which material is posted are all factors that
could offer explicit clues for easier detection of irony.

The work of Boffone and Gal et al. clarifies how Simpson and Felmine
wield irony on TikTok. In their performances, their audiences are meant
to detect and enjoy the difference between what is said and what is
meant: "this pedagogical exercise is in earnest" vs. "we both know that
these words are typically cast as the antithesis of suitable classroom
material." Thus, one is more likely to appreciate the performances'
ironic humor when one is already familiar with the language, power
dynamics, and teacherly posture found in many a Caribbean classroom.
Felmine furthers the irony by admitting that his actual profession is
teaching by regularly adding #boredteacher to his videos, acknowledging
that he is exaggerating mannerisms he may adopt in a real classroom.
These skits adopt the pretence of furthering a viewer's literacy, but
they are actually dependent on that viewer's pre-existing vernacular and
digital literacies to get the joke. Given the finding by Gal et al. that
the "enhanced potential for interpretive failure in the digital network
sphere may be used for the creation of in-group bonds," these videos
function as opportunities to consolidate Caribbean identities via their
ironic humor rather than through shared learning.[^20] Notably, both
series also embed more obvious ironic markers. For example, both series
almost immediately draw on scatological humor: "Ah two two mehself," in
Felmine\'s "A is for Ah," and Simpson's "C is for Coongcy."[^21]
Inclusion of examples like these as well as more derisive comments in
other videos more readily identify this material as incongruous with a
classroom setting, increasing the likelihood that cultural outsiders
would also get the joke.

It would be a misstep to retrospectively position these videos as aiming
to maintain Caribbean artistic traditions of challenging colonial and
imperial legacies. The creators' participation in the calculus of social
media defines the situation. Without denying that the videos offer
opportunities to gain knowledge and erode what is authoritative, the
primary goal here is jokes that translate into likes and follows. Put
simply, Felmine\'s and Simpson\'s videos, while valuable in their own
ways, are not part of a larger enterprise of revolutionizing pedagogy.
Their efforts are distinct from projects like the creation of Grenada's
*Marryshow Reader*, under the auspices of the New Jewel Movement.
Shalini Puri explains this project in *The Grenada Revolution in the
Caribbean Present*: "Merle Hodge, the Trinidadian writer who came to
Grenada to work on education, was at the forefront of the collaborative
process through which the *Marryshow Reader* was created....\[I\]t
contributed to an educational system in which Grenadians could recognize
themselves and their experience as legitimate and normal rather than as
aberrations from a British bourgeois cultural norm."[^22] That
undertaking represented an attempt at social transformation that was
systematic and lasting. The TikTok videos are more accurately described
as fleeting by design: they continue to exist after their consumption,
but that existence is secondary to the promise of future consumption.
Hence Felmine's subsequent launch of "Trini Number Series,"
"Trinounciations," "Tridioms," and "Stephen\'s School of Thought,\"
which all seek to continue the success of the "Trini Alphabet Series"
and thereby entrench his profile as one worth following. TikTok depends
on this implicit promise of incessant generation and consumption of new
cultural products whose aim is to immediately supersede the relevance of
what was previously produced. That promise is what allows one to
accumulate followers.

This distinction emphasizes the fact that cultural production on social
media is bound by the limits of these platforms. Indeed, as Kelly Baker
Josephs explains in "Me, Myself, and Unno," a study of self-fashioning
via blogs, "\[d\]iscourse on digital publishing often promotes the
practice as freeing and enabling for creative enterprise, but, as with
the technologies of language and print, digital communication also
structures what can be said."[^23] At first blush, TikTok seems to
afford people a free creative outlet, as they can produce and circulate
short video clips that can be conveniently recorded and seamlessly
captioned, altered, and stitched in a variety of ways. Brevity and ease
of creation and collaboration contribute to the high production and
consumption rates that characterize the platform. However, scholars like
Josephs, Boffone, and Gal et al. suggest that it is necessary to analyze
more rigorously TikTok's enabling capacities and limitations. Do the
publishing platform's rules about video length incline users like
Felmine and Simpson to depend on sharp expressiveness rather than
extended etymological histories? How can we reconcile the fact that
TikTok's format fundamentally dictates the type of content that
proliferates on its platform with the ways in which creators innovate
within those parameters?

In an introduction to a special section on the app in the *International
Journal of Communication*, Jing Zeng, Crystal Abidin, and Mike S.
Schäfer detail the app's history and the foci of scholarship on the
platform.[^24] The authors explain that 2018 saw \"the Chinese
technological company ByteDance\'s launch of TikTok for the global
market, following the swift success of its sister app, Douyin, in
China\" and with \"the COVID-19 outbreak in 2020, the global lockdowns
further catalyzed the massive expansion and diversification of TikTok\'s
user groups.\"[^25] They note the burgeoning scholarship that
"direct\[s\] scholarly attention to the systemic inequalities entrenched
in the platform logics and governance structures, the platform's initial
dependence on young people and their vernacular innovations that
constitute the early norms on TikTok, and other emerging short-video
platforms."[^26]

In another article, Abidin argues for careful study of internet
celebrity on the app, noting a number of useful distinctions.[^27] She
explains that, as opposed to "the era of persona-based or
profile-anchored fame" that was maintained during the dominance of
YouTube and Instagram, on an app like TikTok, "the nature of fame and
virality has shifted, and tends to be based on the performance of users'
individual posts."[^28] Users are less likely to maintain a uniform
persona and are more likely to adapt to each latest trend or social
media challenge. Viral fame gained from the success of a post or a
series of posts can easily incline a user to leverage it into a
profitable career. As Abidin clarifies, this "era of post-based fame"
inclines TikTok users to opt into "what is 'going viral' at the moment
in order to remain visible to others on the app" and to "attempt to
introduce new trends that may fly or flop, wax and wane, depending on
the flavour of the moment"[^29] In pursuit of such fame, users often aim
to offer posts that simultaneously satisfy target audiences and the
app's algorithms, which favor and popularize select content.

Therefore, studying content on TikTok involves investigating how the app
facilitates collaboration and imitation alongside the ways in which the
app's algorithms determine whose videos are promoted to whom. Zeng et
al. refer to TikTok's For You Page, explaining that "videos are promoted
to users via TikTok's algorithmic recommenders, which are savvy at
personalizing interests and engagement...This recommendation system is
the core intellectual asset of ByteDance."[^30] Andreas Schellewald
clarifies that TikTok's algorithms "observe how users engage with the
videos they see, if they tag them with 'like' or 'not interested,' if
they rewatch them, leave a comment, or read those of others, follow the
creator of the video, or look at their profile pages."[^31] Such
surveillance then determines the app's recommendations. Schellewald
notices the videos' ephemeral nature and offers detailed ethnographic
studies of them, which allows him to declare six overarching
communicative forms: comedic, documentary, communal, interactive,
explanatory, and meta.

The affordances of TikTok's communicative forms meet what is already at
work in the digital culture of the Caribbean. These dynamics are traced
by Jonathan J. Felix, who considers a meme constellation created by
Warren Le Platte in 2016. Felix argues that "\[c\]onceptually, the
alternative media framework acknowledges the political act of
self-publishing as a critical practice that resists commodification,
democratizes public involvement, and allows for the creation of
independent sites or 'free spaces' for counter-discourse and
experimentation."[^32] The existence of such spaces within Trinidad and
Tobago's digital landscape is plausible, and Felmine even suggests such
a reading of his videos, since he retrospectively frames his creations
in terms of the validity of the Creole continuum. In a newspaper
interview, he states, "You can learn to speak 'properly' but you need to
know where you come from. It makes you who you are and you shouldn't be
ashamed of it. It is not 'broken English' but part of the colloquial
tongue."[^33] Felmine is obviously right that the language he revels in
is constitutive of individual and collective identities and worldviews.
His words resonate with Miller's statement "I know the world by how I
speak the world." Miller and Felmine share, in some sense, an
appreciation of how languages relate to reality.

However, Felix's assessment appears rather idealized, as social media is
also a complex commercial industry. As Boffone puts it, "going viral is
no longer about becoming popular for a moment. Going viral is about
clout and making money."[^34] This applies to both content creators and
those who can piggyback on that visibility. Companies in the Caribbean
and elsewhere often roll the latest social media sensations into their
marketing strategies to flog an array of commodities. Boffone explains,
"\[y\]oung people with significant follower counts are lucrative
marketing spaces -- effectively, hyper-specific social media billboards
­that large companies have become increasingly interested in."[^35]
Unsurprisingly, Felmine was recruited by a local company,
Tootoolbay.com, to reproduce his skit format, including the premise of
instruction and the use of vernacular, for an advertisement for their
services. The "T is for Tootoolbay" video reiterates how the cultural
production found on social media can, and often does, serve broader
capitalist needs.[^36] Admittedly, drawing on local comedic talent in
this way is not entirely new. Previous decades saw Dennis 'Sprangalang'
Hall touting Breeze Soap Powder or Shirley 'Beulah' King and Errol
'Stork' St. Hill plugging Kaleidoscope paint. Yet the old and new ways
in which social media and commerce are entangled beg further scrutiny.

In Felmine's case, the interplay between his social media endeavors and
other commercial endeavors suggests that the connotations of his use of
Caribbean vernacular are compatible with the desires of companies. Any
resistance, experimentation, or counter-discourse originally on offer
seems easily tamed, raising the question of whether or not Caribbean
ways of speaking register as a quirk that is easily and profitably
slotted into pre-established digital and commercial forms. These claims
aim to challenge Felix's argument that "Trinbagonian digital
culture...is also a means of maintaining the contours of local identity,
considering increasing globalization and especially the pervasive
process of Americanization" (22). This understanding of Trinbagonian
digital culture, specifically, and of Caribbean digital culture, more
broadly, does not match Felmine's and Simpson's digital undertakings.
While social media users like them may draw on and continue to transform
local histories of humor in some ways, their cultural products are
definitively structured by forces of globalization, specifically the
communicative forms permitted by corporations like Facebook and
ByteDance, which intentionally gel with capitalist needs.

Moreover, as various scholars in TikTok studies make clear,
understanding the significance and risks of what is created within the
app means evaluating how the app extends what is already in existence.
Boffone argues that, "while TikTok is a space that can become a source
of empowerment and agency for some, it is also an app that is plagued
with many of the material issues of racialized identity that are
hallmarks of social life in the United States" (33). Likewise, Melanie
Kennedy, in her study of "the viral spectacle of girls' bedroom culture,
positions certain TikTok phenomena as the "continuation and
intensification of girl culture and the ideals of young female celebrity
of the past two decades" (1070). Yet she also acknowledges how the app
allows for the "obscuring of the dangers and impacts faced by girls
around the world who are situated outside of the ideals embodied in
TikTok stars."[^37] For this reason, analysis of what users generate and
circulate on an app like TikTok requires attention to all that is new,
but must refer to what preceded it.

In terms of analyzing the reception of Caribbean ways of speaking on
social media, I suggest connections to the circumscription of Caribbean
ways of speaking within popular music. The Jamaican dancehall artist Mr.
Vegas or Clifford Smith discussed this issue in his *MV Corner Vlog* on
Facebook in 2016. He made a series of posts to address how Jamaican
music, artistry, and ways of speaking were co-opted by the commercially
successful Canadian rapper Aubrey Drake Graham in his fourth studio
album *Views*.[^38] Mr. Vegas' main contention was that Drake samples
but does not explicitly credit or include Jamaican artists in his album,
thereby continuing Western exploitation of Caribbean musicians.[^39] In
making this point, he clarifies that while U.S. radio stations rebuff
Jamaican artists, they embrace U.S. and Canadian artists who mimic
Jamaican music: "When we take it to your radio station, you're saying
you cannot play our reggae, but you're playing Justin Bieber reggae.
\[...\] People are saying 'oh you guys are not making quality music. We
can\'t understand what you are saying.' That is straight English right
there, unless you don't know how to speak English."[^40] His comment
about "straight English" expresses in a nutshell how Caribbean ways of
speaking may register: they are valid when innocuously garnishing
dominant forms but unintelligible when disruptive to the status quo or
not profitable. His words echo a much quoted statement by Galahad in
Selvon's *The Lonely Londoners*. Galahad retorts to his white English
date who complains about not being able to understand him, "'Is English
we speaking.'"[^41] Selvon tackles how Caribbean ways of speaking are
heard in interpersonal relationships. Mr. Vegas addresses how they are
heard in popular music and within the music industry. I find much of
their critiques to be equally valid when it comes to social media.

There is obviously much more to Caribbean TikTok than what I chose to
focus on in analyzing Felmine's and Simpson's videos. For example,
Abidin cites one of the most noted features of the app, the easy
integration of pre-existing audio clips into original videos, explaining
that it "can be understood as an 'audio meme,' and is the driving
template for content production on TikTok" (80). While both Felmine and
Simpson use original audio, many other Caribbean TikTokers make use of
these audio memes in publishing diverse performances, dances, parodies,
and explicit social commentary. Caribbean TikTok and Caribbean social
media at large offer much novelty and innovation for scholars to engage
with. However, as I show in the following section by attending to how
natural disaster appears in Caribbean social media and in Caribbean
literature, there are also connections to pre-existing social dynamics
and artistic traditions that can be traced.

## Disaster Language: La Soufrière and Andrew Salkey's *Hurricane*

Having considered TikTok examples that aim to, and succeed in, conjuring
laughter, I turn to a more serious example that nonetheless finds
laughter as a response. Upon the devastating eruption of La Soufrière in
April 2021, news reports detailing the event were in high demand, and
iWitness News offered multiple interviews with the people of St.
Vincent, who were simultaneously contending with volcanic ash and the
COVID-19 pandemic. Kenton Chance's interview with a farmer identified
only as "Roni aka 'Smalls'/'Small Man'" from Chateaubelair became
especially popular once posted on iWitness News' Facebook and YouTube
pages.[^42] On Facebook, the video has surpassed 531K views, with over
2700 comments, far exceeding the popularity of other posts from this
news organization.[^43] The appended comments reveal a few reasons for
the surge of interest in this interview. Some social media users
appreciate the interviewee's knack for storytelling and his intimate
perspective on the ramifications of this natural disaster on St.
Vincent\'s agricultural sector. Others celebrate or bemoan his
foolhardiness for staying on the mountains for two nights during the
eruption before eventually fleeing. And a few individuals berate other
commenters for appearing to make light of the man's precarious position,
as many individuals simply offer emojis or gifs depicting laughter while
tagging friends, digitally replicating the conspicuous contagion that
laughter often is.

What is readily apparent in the interview is the contrast in language
between interviewer and interviewee. While Chance employs Standard
English with the recognizable tone and enunciation of many a Caribbean
broadcaster, Roni works with the vernacular of rural St. Vincent. His
stark descriptions such as "Ashes mash up the whole place," together
with his citation of the loss of all the coconut trees in the area and
the dead birds littering the ground begin to depict the absolute
devastation that accompanied this eruption. His comment that the sound
of the volcano's eruption was so loud that "town people might have hear
that and all" directs viewers' attention to how the pre-existing divide
between rural and urban St. Vincent is momentarily transgressed by
disaster. His descriptions evidence close familiarity with the local
environment, referring to place names and landscape details not
immediately known to the interviewer. His testimony reiterates what
Miller notes in his writing: registering the effects of natural disaster
means grappling with sites, people, and activities that official records
often omit. As the interview wraps up, Chance secures access to Roni's
digital documentation of the volcano\'s devastation on his tablet
computer. The final minutes of the video show a crowd circling Roni as
everyone peruses the photographs and videos of the volcano's devastation
that Roni has prepared them for and continues to narrate.

To situate such testimony of disaster survival in longer histories, I
turn to Lizabeth Paravisini-Gebert's "Mourning the Dead of St. Pierre in
the Yellow Press.\"[^44] She considers the 1902 eruption of Mont Pelée
in Martinique, which she identifies as both "the twentieth century\'s
deadliest volcanic eruption" and "the first natural disaster of the
protomodern mass media."[^45] Given the technological advancements of
that era, representations of Mont Pelée's eruption in newspaper stories
and photographs circulated widely. Paravisini-Gebert analyzes the
difference in treatment of dead white people and dead Black Martinicans
in these representations, especially in the yellow press. In reading
what was and was not photographed in the volcano's aftermath,
Paravisini-Gebert compares "the objectified dead" and "the mourned
dead," since the corpses of Black Martinicans were photographed in a way
that "ascribes agency to the viewers and relegates the dead to a
curiosity," producing "an ambivalent space marked by the absence of
concern or a sense of loss."[^46]

Unlike natural disasters of previous eras, local inhabitants\' narration
of their own experience of natural disasters in the present-day
Caribbean is more likely and more accessible, suggesting disruption of
that history of absences identified by Paravisini-Gebert. Testimonies
like Roni\'s begin to answer the difficult question of what language
relays the ineffable destruction that may follow a natural disaster.
Hearing his tale allows one to reconsider, for instance, human fragility
in relation to the natural world, but there is no guarantee against
mishearing testimonies like Roni's, especially in, as Gal et. al. put
it, "the networked, fragmented, and hyperlinked arena of social media."
Given the accumulated connotations, what inclines or disinclines
Caribbean and non-Caribbean audiences from registering vernacular
expressions of grief, fear, or trauma that circulate on social media as
anything but a curiosity? In terms of fictional representations of
grief, fear, and trauma that is offered in Caribbean vernacular, there
is a history of readers receiving the humor without necessarily
appreciating the hardship. For example, I have previously considered
this issue in relation to Selvon's lonely Londoners, arguing that
readers may read his description of the plight of Caribbean immigrants
in London as funny episodes told compellingly without fully
acknowledging how the dignity of his characters is repeatedly
compromised.[^47] To hear one without the other is to further their
loneliness.

Without discounting the fact that one can use humor to cope with
hardship or the fact that one may draw on humor when narrating one's own
experience, I am suggesting that many social media users (especially,
but not exclusively, those outside the Caribbean and therefore less
likely to encounter vernacular regularly) are primed to hear vernacular
testimonies as funny, because of the connotations that the vernacular
has accumulated in the digital environment. Since academic work, news
reports, government documents and the like favor Standard English in the
Caribbean digital landscape, Standard English monopolizes the serious,
while the vernacular is pigeonholed as the funny. That label of
funniness not only means that the concerns of speakers of the vernacular
are made obtusely humorous but speakers are also cast as undeserving of
serious consideration, without political consequence, or on the margins
of the public sphere. As with irony, contextual cues surrounding a post
could disrupt such impositions of funniness, but they could just as
easily reinforce them.

What is at stake in hearing vernacular descriptions of disaster in this
manner is made clear by Andrew Salkey in his novel *Hurricane*. I refer
to this novel as it is one that lays bare the intersections of disaster,
language, and media. My reading of the novel supports my argument that,
if users of social media replicate extant social dynamics, then analysis
of social media use in the Caribbean benefits from the analytical work
done by writers like Salkey. His novel provides heuristics for
understanding how individuals scramble for language to describe
experiences that defy easy description, how we may turn to the language
popularized by dominant cultural forms, and how such moments of disaster
threaten individual and collective sensibilities.

While Salkey\'s works remain understudied, they endure as favourites.
For instance, in a 2016 interview with *The* *New York Times*, Zadie
Smith is prompted, "Tell us about your favorite overlooked or
underheralded writer," to which she replies, "A Jamaican writer called
Andrew Salkey, who wrote a Y.A. novel called *Hurricane* before Y.A. was
a term. I remember it as the book that made me want to write."[^48]
Published in 1964, *Hurricane* is the first in Salkey's disaster
quartet: it was followed by *Earthquake* (1965), *Drought* (1966), and
*Riot* (1967). Given its intended audience, the novel takes the form of
a relatively straightforward first-person narrative told by thirteen
year-old Joe Brown as he anticipates and survives the onslaught of
Hurricane Chod, bunkered in his Kingston home with his mother, father,
and sister. Readers are not fellow survivors of the depicted hurricane.
Instead, as witnesses of Joe's survival, and that of his family and
friends, readers see the limitations of characters' perspectives. As a
representation of disaster, *Hurricane* essentially creates space to
inspect the intersections of competing discourses and ideologies as they
relate to comprehending disaster.

This focus on the hurricane itself departs from other readings of the
novel that view the hurricane and characters\' survival as commentary on
the national consciousness of newly independent Jamaica. In "The
Political Ecology of Storms in the Caribbean," Sharae Deckard briefly
engages with *Hurricane* within her excellent consideration of storms
and storm aesthetics in texts from the Anglophone, Hispanophone, and
Francophone Caribbean. She argues that the hurricane "engenders a
collective geographical consciousness symbolized by Joe\'s constant
imagination of the plight of the rest of the island."[^49] She reads
*Hurricane* as a novel that "narrativizes Jamaica\'s resilience,"
thereby fitting the novel into a category of Anglophone Caribbean
children's literature in which hurricanes are "straightforwardly linked
to a celebratory politics of decolonization."[^50]

Deckard is right in identifying the novel\'s emphasis on collective
bonds, yet *Hurricane* also stresses the fact that different characters
draw on different lexicons to contend with this moment. *Hurricane*
foregrounds Joe's maturation, but it also aims to understand what is
involved in articulating disaster in the moment of its occurrence. For
example, Joe\'s father refers to his previous experience with natural
disasters in Jamaica, recalling the drought of 1932-1933. He understands
the silence during the hurricane's eye by identifying it as the "'same
sort of silence when there's a drought on.'"[^51] That capacity to
partially make sense of the moment provides him with some semblance of
security when little is assured for him or his family. Joe's mother, in
turn, refers to the Bible. She makes numerous, humorous references to
Noah's Ark before the hurricane's arrival and then rereads and recites
Psalm 91 for comfort while enduring Chod's worst. Her relationship with
Christianity is distinct from the doomsday anticipation of the street
preacher, Mother Samuel, who warns at the start of the novel that the
"'entire population of this wicked Island of ours is going to perish by
hurricane at midnight tonight.'"[^52] While Mother Samuel stands out as
an alarmist with her apocalyptic vision, Joe's mother produces
reassurance via her religious sensibilities. Her attitude, Joe explains,
allows "\[y\]ou \[to\] feel that she has taken everything off your
shoulders" because "\[i\]t\'s as though the hurricane is attacking *her*
personally."[^53] She positions herself as a protective,
self-sacrificing force in the lives of her children by taking
instruction from the benevolent promise of protection found in Psalm 91.

Likewise, the novel considers what children like Joe and his friends
reach for to understand what seems incomprehensible. While Milton
Perkins or 'B.B' (as in Brainy Boy) draws on statistics and scientific
facts, movies constitute Joe's frame of reference. The movie theater
itself, the Carib, is an outsized landmark in his worldview; hence his
likening it to Jamaica's Blue Mountain.[^54] The fact that the Carib
emerges unscathed at the novel's end is an overt suggestion that all is
not lost despite the hurricane's devastation. Joe's dependence on
movies, however, goes beyond his love for the Carib. The movies ground
his vocabulary. As he listens to Hurricane Chod gain strength, Joe
compares the thunder to "a bomb exploding in a war-film."[^55] Surveying
the aftermath of the hurricane and discovering a lamppost coated in mud
and debris, Joe is "reminded...of a creature from outer space in a
science-fiction film."[^56] Joe depends on U.S. films seen in the Carib
theater to make sense of the immediate. They loom so large in his
imagination that their clichés and conventions are what he draws on to
comprehend what is, to him, unprecedented. They not only allow him a
filmic vocabulary but also enable his conception of his relationship to
this context. As the hurricane becomes stronger, Joe explains he was not
afraid but thrilled: "I felt the way someone feels when he's sitting
down in Carib and watching a film that's packed with suspense and big
drama."[^57] For better or worse, Joe understands himself not as
potential casualty but as a safe and entertained audience.

Joe's turn to movies to make sense of Chod accords with his descriptions
of his friends, family, and himself through such cultural products. As
narrator, he defines his friends\' personalities through reference to
their typical behaviour in the cinema, whether it's 'Four Eyes' Dodd\'s
habit of "supplying background music when there wasn\'t any," 'Popeye'
Mason's desire to "shadow-box every time there was a fight" on screen,
or 'Shaved Head' Chin being so sensitive so as to be "known to cry
during a cartoon film."[^58] Likewise, when his sister, Mary, questions
him about his whereabouts while everyone else was sleeping, he compares
her to one of those "police officers in the gangster films where the
poor suspect is put under a large, bright desk-lamp and cross-questioned
for hours on end."[^59] In some ways, readers may chalk up Joe\'s
consistent reference to movies as indicative of children\'s
indefatigable imagination. Karen Sands-O'Connor reads *Hurricane* within
the category of British Children\'s Literature and argues that Salkey
shows that "\[i\]magination is one of humanity's tools; it can enhance
life, as in the case of the movie theater, and it can overcome disaster,
but only when used in community."[^60] Similarly, Deckard emphasizes the
novel's display of "the power of culture and imagination."[^61] She
argues that for Joe the hurricane "is not traumatizing," but "gives rise
to Joe's own desire to write the story of its impact," which she sees as
emblematic of "the mythopoetic impulse embodied in the new
generation."[^62]

That *Hurricane* foregrounds Joe's imaginative flare is undeniable, but
the novel is more than an appreciation of the power of one child's
imagination or the imaginative power of Jamaicans. The novel takes pains
to consistently show that Joe is drawing on popular culture to
understand what is in many ways incomprehensible. He has never seen
nature so aggressive, his house so fragile, or adults so fraught with
worry. Despite the seasonal nature of hurricanes in the Caribbean, the
thirteen-year-old Joe is experiencing something novel; and given the
narrative structure of *Hurricane*, readers have intimate access to his
evolving imagination. The novel makes space for readers to understand
how disaster may strain and even rupture individual sensibilities, and
readers are encouraged to consider what ideological shifts Joe manages
via the models of his parents. For example, readers learn of Joe's
initial investment in fantasies about handling the hurricane as one
would a threat in a Western movie. Before the hurricane's arrival, Joe
absconds to the Race Course to act out a cliché scene that incorporates
the arrival of "Big Blow," which curtails the showdown between the
Sheriff and Rango.[^63] He abandons these fantasies and dread sets in as
the hurricane becomes stronger and the devastation more real. As the
house floods, he says, "I, for one, began feeling a creeping sense of
panic rising to my throat" (87). Perceiving the "tired and strained"
faces of his mother and sister, Joe elects to follow his father\'s lead:
"he and I got down to work" (87). In this moment of heightened risk, Joe
shifts from modelling himself after movies to emulating the words,
views, and actions of his father.

The hurricane's aftermath bolsters this sensibility. As father and son
engage in post-disaster repair, Joe becomes noticeably dismayed at the
wreck of his father's workroom, and his father scolds, "'Big men don\'t
cry, Joe. They plan.'"[^64] Later, observing the damage done to the new
house in Harbour View that the Browns had been anticipating moving into,
Joe repeats this maxim to his father.[^65] Salkey may have been sincere
in this misguided advice, given other instances of rigid gender norms in
the novel. For instance, when questioned by his sister, Joe says, "I
consoled myself when I remembered that all females, young and old, are
pretty much on the same level where tormenting a man is concerned" (43).
Regardless of the blinkered machismo put forth, the novel simultaneously
demonstrates that disaster can be described as a moment of extreme
ideological need wherein the ideas or discourses that one previously
relied on are put to the test and either proven insufficient and
discarded or prove useful and are concretized. This is not to say those
dispositions are inherently natural, good, or healthy, but in not being
disproven in a moment where survival is in question, they are in effect
taken as validated and worth bequeathing. Representations of such
disasters, whether factual testimonies or fictional narratives,
therefore offer opportunities to resolve urgent ideological
contradictions.

## Conclusion 

Salkey is not alone in advocating for the capacity to carefully parse
how Caribbean people know and speak disaster. In his invaluable
exploration of nation language and "the tyranny of the pentameter" in
*History of the Voice*, Kamau Brathwaite declares, "The hurricane does
not roar in pentameters."[^66] Brathwaite expounds on the limits of
imposed rhythms and poetic forms when it comes to representing the
Caribbean. He instead directs our attention to nation language or, as
Brathwaite puts it, "an English which is not the standard, imported,
educated English, but that of the submerged, surrealist experience and
sensibility, which has always been there and which is now increasingly
coming to the surface and influencing the perception of contemporary
Caribbean people."[^67] Likewise, Ishion Hutchinson, in his poem "After
the Hurricane," asks readers to note whose words are heard when it comes
to assessing a hurricane's aftermath. The speaker of the poem contrasts
what government surveyors officially document with Aunt May's individual
experience of loss. They "scribble facts" and "draw tables" but "they
can\'t say / how it tore down her senses."[^68] Hutchinson's poem, like
Salkey's novel, argues that grappling with disaster means finding, in
Brathwaite's words, \"the syllabic intelligence, to describe the
hurricane, which is our own experience.\"[^69]

These writers demonstrate the evolution of artistic traditions in the
Caribbean that critically evaluate dominant ways of representing and
knowing reality, offer alternatives, and promote the aptitude to engage
with those alternatives. These traditions demand rather than resist
rigorous attention to technological and cultural innovation and offer
valuable models of cultural critique. Take, for instance, Brathwaite's
discussion of the calypso form in *History of the Voice*. Brathwaite
identifies Trinidadian calypsonian Mighty Sparrow or Slinger Francisco
as a folk poet whose work exemplifies the power of nation language, and
he offers this reading of Sparrow's \"Ten to One is Murder\": \"There is
in fact a \'tent\' form known as calypso drama, which calls upon
Trinidadian nation-forms like *grand charge, picong, robber talk*, and
so on, which Sparrow is in fact consciously using in this
calypso.\"[^70] One might assume that adapting such nation-forms into
TikTok videos or other social media content inevitably broadens the
reach of nation language. However, as this article asserts, usage of
vernacular on social media risks decontextualization, distortion, and
willful misinterpretation. Mitigation of these risks is not about social
media users learning their vernacular ABCs but about overturning all
that circumscribes vernacular to funniness. Until then, uses of
vernacular on social media are more likely to register as the dialect
\"\[c\]aricature speaks in\" rather than as what Brathwaite names nation
language.[^71]

Bibliography

Abidin, Crystal. \"Mapping Internet Celebrity on TikTok: Exploring
Attention Economies and

Visibility Labours,\" *Cultural Science Journal* 12, no. 1 (2020):
77--103,

<https://doi.org/10.5334/csci.140>

Boffone, Trevor. *Renegades:* *Digital Dance Cultures from Dubsmash to
TikTok*. Oxford: Oxford

University Press, 2021.

Brathwaite, Edward Kamau. *History of the Voice*. London: New Beacon
Books, 1984.

Buick, Tenn. \"Hindi/Guyanese Creole Challenge Pt. 7,\" Video, 00:39,
October 20, 2020,
<https://web.archive.org/web/20211222014832/https://www.tiktok.com/@tennbuick/video/6885832612460416262>.\
\
Deckard, Sharae. \"The Political Ecology of Storms in the Caribbean.\"
In *The Caribbean: Aesthetics, World-Ecology, Politics*, edited by Chris
Campbell and Michael Niblett, 24-45. Liverpool: Liverpool University
Press, 2016.

Felix, Jonathan J. \"Culture Jamming in the Caribbean: A Case of
Alternative Media through

Double Alternativity in Trinidad and Tobago.\" *archipelagos: a journal
of Caribbean*

*digital praxis* 5 (December 2020): 1-28.

Felmine, Stephon. \"Trini Alphabet Series: A is for Ah.\" Video, 00:21,
September 24, 2020,
https://web.archive.org/web/20210517152122/https://www.tiktok.com/@stephon23/video/6876192861981805825.

\-\--. \"Trini Alphabet Series: B is for Braggadang.\" Video, 00:21,
September 25, 2020,
https://web.archive.org/web/20210517124550/https://www.tiktok.com/@stephon23/video/6876543232352750849.

\-\--. \"Trini Alphabet Series: E is for Eh-heh.\" Video, 00:19,
September 29, 2020,
<https://web.archive.org/web/20210517152619/https://www.tiktok.com/@stephon23/video/6877648583332482305>.

\-\--. \"Trini Alphabet Series: L is for Lickrish.\" Video, 00:19,
October 5, 2020,
https://web.archive.org/web/20210521212749/https://www.tiktok.com/@stephon23/video/6880263506437033217.

\-\--. \"Trini Alphabet Series: M is for Mamaguy.\" Video, 00:21,
October, 6 2020,
<https://web.archive.org/web/20210521212940/https://www.tiktok.com/@stephon23/video/6880626990009847041>.

Gal, Noam, Zohar Kampf, and Limor Shifman. \"SRSLY?? A Typology of
Online Ironic

Markers.\" *Information, Communication & Society* (September 2020):
1-18. <https://doi.org/10.1080/1369118X.2020.1814380>.

Grizzle, Shereita. \"Drake is Fake! -- Mr. Vegas,\" *The Jamaica Star*
(Jamaica), May 21, 2016,
<https://web.archive.org/web/20210521130352/http://jamaica-star.com/article/entertainment/20160521/drake-fake-mr-vegas>.

Hutchinson, Ishion. *House of Lords and Commons*. New York: Farrar,
Straus and Giroux, 2016.

iWitness News. \"Two Night on an Erupting Volcano.\" Facebook, April 14,
2021, <https://www.facebook.com/iwnsvg/videos/381706549527009>

\-\--. \"Two Nights on an Erupting Volcano.\" Video, 9:24, April 14,
2021, <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=oFfu1RDmZNg>.

Josephs, Kelly Baker. \"Me, Myself, and Unno: Writing the Queer
Caribbean Self into Digital

Community.\" a*rchipelagos: a journal of Caribbean digital praxis* 5
(2020): 6.

Kennedy, Melanie. \"\'If the rise of the TikTok dance and e-girl
aesthetic has taught us anything,

it's that teenage girls rule the internet right now\': TikTok Celebrity,
Girls and the

Coronavirus Crisis.\" *European Journal of Cultural Studies* 23, no. 6
(July 2020): 1069-76. https://doi: 10.1177/1367549420945341

Mendes-Franco, Janine. \"Caribbean Alphabet Series Provides Lots of
Laughs on TikTok.\"

*Global Voices* (Netherlands), October 15, 2020,
<https://web.archive.org/web/20210526221358/https://globalvoices.org/2020/10/15/caribbean-alphabet-series-provides-lots-of-laughs-on-tiktok/>.

Miller, Kei. *The Cartographer Tries to Map a Way to Zion*. Manchester:
Carcanet Press, 2014.

\-\--. \"An Interview with Kei Miller.\" An interview by Eleanor
Wachtel, *Brick: A Literary Journal*,

2018\.
<https://web.archive.org/web/20210506182419/https://brickmag.com/an-interview-with-kei-miller/>.

Meusa, Shamar. \"\'Wello\' Makes Waves with Guyanese Alphabet Series.\"
*Stabroek News* 26

(July 2020),
<https://www.stabroeknews.com/2020/07/26/sunday/wello-makes-waves-with-guyanese-alphabet-series/>.

Neaves, Julien. "From ABC to 123, Trini Alphabet Guy Goes Viral."
*Trinidad and Tobago*

*Newsday*, (Trinidad and Tobago), November 10, 2020,
<https://web.archive.org/web/20201117185825/https://newsday.co.tt/2020/11/10/from-abc-to-123-trini-alphabet-guy-goes-viral/>.

Paravisini-Gebert, Lizabeth. "Mourning the Dead of St. Pierre in the
Yellow Press." *Small Axe*

*Salon* 12 (May 2013),
https://web.archive.org/web/20210127160448/http://smallaxe.net/sxsalon/discussions/mourning-dead-st-pierre-yellow-press.

Paul, Sean. "Jamaican Lingo Pt. 1." Video, 00:34, April 7, 2020.
<https://web.archive.org/web/20211222014609/https://www.tiktok.com/@duttypaul/video/6948484636750220549>.

Puri, Shalini. *The Grenada Revolution in the Caribbean Present:
Operation Urgent Memory*.

London: Palgrave MacMillan, 2014.

Salkey, Andrew. *Hurricane*. Leeds: Peepal Tree Press, 2011.

Sands-O\'Connor, Karen. *Soon Come Home to This Island: West Indians in
British Caribbean*

*Literature*. New York: Routledge, 2008.

Schellewald, Andreas. \"Communicative Forms on TikTok: Perspectives from
Digital

Ethnography.\" *International Journal of Communication* 15 (2021):
1437-57.

Selvon, Samuel. *The Lonely Londoners*. London: Penguin, 2006.

Simpson, Kwame. \"Arinj.\" Video, 00:13, May 22, 2020,
https://web.archive.org/web/20210517150915/https://www.tiktok.com/@wellonyc/video/6829872495324155142.

\-\--. \"the letter of the day!\" Video, 00:18, June 7, 2020,
https://web.archive.org/web/20210517151749/https://www.tiktok.com/@wellonyc/video/6835776554933439750.

Singh, Kris and Dale Tracy. \"Assuming Niceness: Private and Public
Relationships in Drake\'s *Nothing Was the Same*.\" *Popular Music* 34,
no. 1 (2015): 94-112.

\-\--. \"Is Joke You Joking?\", *Pree: Caribbean. Writing* 3 (2019),
<https://web.archive.org/web/20201201081351/https://preelit.com/2019/04/20/is-joke-you-joking/>.

Smith, Clifford. \"MV Corner: Mr. Vegas Responds...\" Facebook, May 23,
2016,

<https://www.facebook.com/MrVegasMusic/videos/10154195593144486/>.

Smith, Zadie. \"Zadie Smith: By the Book.\" *The New York Times* (New
York), November 17, 2016,
<https://web.archive.org/web/20201112011909/https://www.nytimes.com/2016/11/20/books/review/zadie-smith-by-the-book.html>.

Tootoolbay.com, \"Letter of the Day: T is for Tootoolbay.com\" Facebook,
October 23, 2020,
<https://www.facebook.com/tootoolbay/videos/649301035954820/>.

Zeng, Jing, Crystal Abidin, and Mike S. Schäfer, \"Research Perspectives
on TikTok and Its

Legacy Apps: Introduction.\" *International Journal of Communication* 15
(2021):

3161-72.

## Bio

Kris Singh is a faculty member in the English Department at Kwantlen
Polytechnic University. His scholarly and creative attention spans the
legacy of indentureship, the relationships among writers of the
Caribbean diaspora, and the ways in which social media and popular
culture shape each other.

## Abstract

This paper considers how Caribbean ways of speaking map onto social
media by analyzing two popular TikTok series as well as the testimony of
a survivor of the 2021 eruption of La Soufrière that was widely
circulated on Facebook. Understanding what Caribbean cultural production
on social media entails means appreciating social media platforms like
TikTok as commercial entities. As such, they define what can be produced
and influence what audiences are likely to register as funny. Though
Caribbean people\'s representations of themselves may seem more
accessible than ever, the ways in which we hear each other on social
media remains unevenly defined. Juxtaposing this consideration of the
Caribbean digital landscape with Andrew Salkey\'s *Hurricane*, I argue
that the connotations that social media usages of vernacular have
accumulated risk compromising the opportunities for ideological
inspection that fictional and non-fictional representations of disaster
make possible.

---

[^1]: Stephon Felmine, \"Trini Alphabet Series: L is for Lickrish,\"
    TikTok Video, Oct 5, 2020
    https://web.archive.org/web/20210521212749/https://www.tiktok.com/@stephon23/video/6880263506437033217

    Stephon Felmine, \"Trini Alphabet Series: M is for Mamaguy,\" TikTok
    Video, Oct 6, 2020
    <https://web.archive.org/web/20210521212940/https://www.tiktok.com/@stephon23/video/6880626990009847041>

[^2]: Stephon Felmine, \"Trini Alphabet Series: B is for Braggadang,\"
    TikTok Video, Sept 25, 2020
    https://web.archive.org/web/20210517124550/https://www.tiktok.com/@stephon23/video/6876543232352750849

[^3]: Stephon Felmine, \"Trini Alphabet Series: E is for Eh-heh,\"
    TikTok Video, Sept 29, 2020
    <https://web.archive.org/web/20210517152619/https://www.tiktok.com/@stephon23/video/6877648583332482305>

[^4]: Kei Miller, *The Cartographer Tries to Map a Way to Zion*
    (Manchester: Carcanet Press, 2014).

[^5]: Kei Miller, \"An Interview with Kei Miller,\" interview by Eleanor
    Wachtel, *Brick: A Literary Journal* (2018): no pages.
    <https://web.archive.org/web/20210506182419/https://brickmag.com/an-interview-with-kei-miller/>

[^6]: Miller, \"An Interview with Kei Miller.\"

[^7]: Given the shifting terminology for local forms of speech across
    the Caribbean, I use the term vernacular to refer to Caribbean ways
    of speaking aside from what is formally recognized as Standard
    English or popularly referred to as proper English.

[^8]: Sean Paul, \"Jamaican Lingo Pt. 1,\" TikTok Video (Apr 7, 2020),
    https://web.archive.org/web/20211222014609/https://www.tiktok.com/@duttypaul/video/6948484636750220549

[^9]: Tenn Buick, \"Hindi/Guyanese Creole Challenge Pt. 7,\" TikTok
    Video (Oct 20, 2020),
    <https://web.archive.org/web/20211222014832/https://www.tiktok.com/@tennbuick/video/6885832612460416262>

[^10]: A dispute between Simpson and Felmine regarding intellectual
    property emerged. See Janine Mendes-Franco, \"Caribbean Alphabet
    Series Provides Lots of Laughs on TikTok,\" *Global Voices* (15
    October 2020): no pages,
    <https://web.archive.org/web/20210526221358/https://globalvoices.org/2020/10/15/caribbean-alphabet-series-provides-lots-of-laughs-on-tiktok/>

[^11]: Kwame Simpson, \"Arinj,\" TikTok Video (22 May 2020),
    https://web.archive.org/web/20210517150915/https://www.tiktok.com/@wellonyc/video/6829872495324155142

[^12]: Shamar Meusa, \"\'Wello\' Makes Waves with Guyanese Alphabet
    Series,\" *Stabroek News* (26 July 2020),
    <https://www.stabroeknews.com/2020/07/26/sunday/wello-makes-waves-with-guyanese-alphabet-series/>

[^13]: Trevor Boffone, *Renegades:* *Digital Dance Cultures from
    Dubsmash to TikTok* (Oxford: Oxford UP, 2021), 12.

[^14]: Boffone, *Renegades*, 17.

[^15]: Boffone, *Renegades*, 81.

[^16]: Boffone, *Renegades*, 89-90.

[^17]: Noam Gal, Zohar Kampf and Limor Shifman, \"SRSLY?? A Typology of
    Online Ironic Markers*,\" Information, Communication & Society*
    (September 2020), <https://doi.org/10.1080/1369118X.2020.1814380>

[^18]: Gal, Kampf, and Limor, 1-4.

[^19]: Gal, Kampf, and Limor, 7.

[^20]: Gal, Kampf, and Limor, 2.

[^21]: Stephon Felmine, \"Trini Alphabet Series: A is for Ah,\" TikTok
    Video (September 24, 2020 ),
    https://web.archive.org/web/20210517152122/https://www.tiktok.com/@stephon23/video/6876192861981805825

    Kwame Simpson, \"the letter of the day!\" TikTok Video (June 7,
    2020),
    https://web.archive.org/web/20210517151749/https://www.tiktok.com/@wellonyc/video/6835776554933439750

[^22]: Shalini Puri, *The Grenada Revolution in the Caribbean Present:
    Operation Urgent Memory* (London: Palgrave MacMillan, 2014), 52.

[^23]: Kelly Baker Jospehs, \"Me, Myself, and Unno: Writing the Queer
    Caribbean Self into Digital Community,\" *archipelagos* 5 (2020): 6.

[^24]: Jing Zeng, Crystal Abidin, and Mike S. Schäfer, \"Research
    Perspectives on TikTok and Its Legacy Apps: Introduction*,\"
    International Journal of Communication* 15 (2021): 3161-3172.

[^25]: Zeng, Abidin, and Schäfer, "Research," 3161-3163.

[^26]: Zeng, Abidin, and Schäfer, "Research," 3166.

[^27]: Crystal Abidin, \"Mapping Internet Celebrity on TikTok: Exploring
    Attention Economies and Visibility Labours,\" *Cultural Science
    Journal* 12, no. 1 (2020): 77--103.

[^28]: Abidin, "Mapping," 79.

[^29]: Abidin, "Mapping," 79-80.

[^30]: Zeng, Abidin, and Schäfer, "Research," 3163.

[^31]: Andreas Schellewald, \"Communicative Forms on TikTok:
    Perspectives from Digital Ethnography,\" *International Journal of
    Communication* 15 2021: 1438.

[^32]: Jonathan J. Felix, \"Culture Jamming in the Caribbean: A Case of
    Alternative Media through Double Alternativity in Trinidad and
    Tobago,\" *archipelagos* 5 (2020): 21.

[^33]: Julien Neaves, \"From ABC to 123, Trini Alphabet Guy Goes
    Viral,\" *Trinidad and Tobago Newsday* (10 Nov 2020),
    <https://web.archive.org/web/20201117185825/https://newsday.co.tt/2020/11/10/from-abc-to-123-trini-alphabet-guy-goes-viral/>.

[^34]: Boffone, *Renegades*, 57.

[^35]: Boffone, *Renegades*, 57.

[^36]: Tootoolbay.com, \"Letter of the Day: T is for Tootoolbay.com,\"
    (Oct 2020),
    <https://www.facebook.com/tootoolbay/videos/649301035954820/>

[^37]: Melanie Kennedy, \"\'If the rise of the TikTok dance and e-girl
    aesthetic has taught us anything, it's that teenage girls rule the
    internet right now\': TikTok Celebrity, Girls and the Coronavirus
    Crisis,\" *European Journal of Cultural Studies* 23, no. 6 (2020):
    1070-1071.

[^38]: I have previously interrogated Drake's positioning in the hip hop
    genre. See Kris Singh and Dale Tracy, \"Assuming Niceness: Private
    and Public Relationships in Drake's *Nothing Was the Same*,\"
    *Popular Music* 34, no. 1 (2015): 94-112.

[^39]: See Shereita Grizzle, \"Drake is Fake! -- Mr. Vegas,\" *The
    Jamaica Star* (May 21, 2016),
    <https://web.archive.org/web/20210521130352/http://jamaica-star.com/article/entertainment/20160521/drake-fake-mr-vegas>

[^40]: Clifford Smith, \"MV Corner: Mr. Vegas Responds...\" Facebook
    Video (23 May 2016),

    <https://www.facebook.com/MrVegasMusic/videos/10154195593144486/>.

[^41]: Samuel Selvon, *The Lonely Londoners* (London: Penguin, 2006),
    82.

[^42]: \"Two Nights on an Erupting Volcano,\" *iWitness News*, You Tube
    (14 Apr 2021), <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=oFfu1RDmZNg>

[^43]: \"Two Night on an Erupting Volcano,\" *iWitness News*, Facebook
    (14 April 2021),
    <https://www.facebook.com/iwnsvg/videos/381706549527009>

[^44]: Lizabeth Paravisini-Gebert, \"Mourning the Dead of St. Pierre in
    the Yellow Press,\" *Small Axe Salon* 12 (May 2013),
    https://web.archive.org/web/20210127160448/http://smallaxe.net/sxsalon/discussions/mourning-dead-st-pierre-yellow-press

[^45]: Paravisini-Gebert, \"Mourning the Dead of St. Pierre in the
    Yellow Press,\" paragraphs 1 and 16.

[^46]: Paravisini-Gebert, \"Mourning,\" paragraph 16.

[^47]: Kris Singh, \"Is Joke You Joking?,\" *Pree: Caribbean. Writing* 3
    (Spring 2019),
    <https://web.archive.org/web/20201201081351/https://preelit.com/2019/04/20/is-joke-you-joking/>.

[^48]: Zadie Smith, \"Zadie Smith: By the Book,\" *The New York Times*
    (November 17, 2016),
    <https://web.archive.org/web/20201112011909/https://www.nytimes.com/2016/11/20/books/review/zadie-smith-by-the-book.html>

[^49]: Sharae Deckard, \"The Political Ecology of Storms in the
    Caribbean,\" in *The Caribbean: Aesthetics, World-Ecology,
    Politics*, eds. Chris Campbell and Michael Niblett (Liverpool:
    Liverpool UP, 2016), 34.

[^50]: Deckard, \"The Political," 33-34.

[^51]: Andrew Salkey, *Hurricane* (Leeds: Peepal Tree Press, 2011), 72.

[^52]: Salkey, *Hurricane*, 20.

[^53]: Salkey, *Hurricane*, 60.

[^54]: Salkey, *Hurricane*, 34.

[^55]: Salkey, *Hurricane*, 56.

[^56]: Salkey, *Hurricane*, 90.

[^57]: Salkey, *Hurricane*, 56.

[^58]: Salkey, *Hurricane*, 18.

[^59]: Salkey, *Hurricane*, 43.

[^60]: Karen Sands-O'Connor, *Soon Come Home to This Island: West
    Indians in British Caribbean Literature* (New York: Routledge,
    2008), 144-5.

[^61]: Deckard, \"The Political,\" 34.

[^62]: Deckard, \"The Political,\" 34.

[^63]: Salkey, *Hurricane*, 38.

[^64]: Salkey, *Hurricane*, 89.

[^65]: Salkey, *Hurricane*, 97.

[^66]: Edward Kamau Brathwaite, *History of the Voice* (London: New
    Beacon Books, 1984), 32 and 10.

[^67]: Brathwaite, *History*, 13.

[^68]: Ishion Hutchinson, \"After the Hurricane,\" in *House of Lords
    and Commons* (New York: Farrar, Straus and Giroux, 2016), 15-16.

[^69]: Brathwaite, *History*, 8.

[^70]: Brathwaite, *History*, 26.

[^71]: Brathwaite, *History*, 13.
