---
layout: article
section: articles
title: 
  "long": "Decolonizing the Archival Record about the Enslaved: Digitizing the *Barbados Mercury Gazette*"
  "short": "Decolonizing the Archival Record about the Enslaved"
doi: ""
author: 
- name: Amalia Levi
  shortname: Levi
  bio: >
    Amalia S. Levi is an archivist and cultural heritage professional currently residing in Barbados. She is the founding director of the HeritEdge Connection, a nonprofit organization dedicated to forging collaborations and connecting people, resources, and institutions through cultural heritage projects. She has conducted various documentation and digitization projects funded through grants by the Endangered Archives Programme and the Modern Endangered Archives Program. Amalia holds an MLS, with a concentration in archives, and an MA in history, with a concentration in Jewish studies, both from the University of Maryland; an MA in museum studies from Yildiz University in Istanbul, Turkey; and a BA in archaeology and history of art from the University of Athens, Greece. Amalia is interested in augmenting and facilitating historical scholarship on diasporas and marginalized groups by linking and enriching dispersed collections with digital tools.
- name: Tara A. Inniss
  shortname: Inniss
  bio: >
    Tara A. Inniss is a lecturer in the Department of History and Philosophy at, the University of the West Indies (UWI), Cave Hill Campus. The areas of focus for her teaching and research include history of medicine, history of social policy, and heritage and social development. In 2002–3, she received a Split-Site Commonwealth PhD Scholarship to study at the UWI/University of Manchester. Her thesis was on children's health during slavery and the apprenticeship periods. In 2007, she completed a master's in international social development at the University of New South Wales in Sydney, Australia. She received her PhD in history from the University of the West Indies, Cave Hill Campus in 2008. Tara currently sits on several committees for the Barbados World Heritage Committee, the Barbados Museum and Historical Society, and the Association of Caribbean Historians. She is the director of the UWI/OAS Caribbean Heritage Network and the coordinator of Heritage studies.
date: January, 2020
issue: 4
order: 3
abstract: >
  This article discusses the digitization of the historic newspaper the *Barbados Mercury Gazette* (1783–1848) and its potential for historical research and teaching. The newspaper sheds light on every aspect of life in a dystopian colonial reality. The digitization of the gazette is a beginning, rather than a \"finished product.\" The aim of the project is not simply to facilitate reading the gazette in a digital format; if so, then digitization would risk reproducing and re-inscribing inequalities, silences, and exclusions. The aim is to engage users, particularly Barbadians, in researching their enslaved ancestors. At the same time, the article reflects on the meaning of digitization in postcolonial settings in the global South and the challenges arising at the intersection of access and conservation. While digitization is promoted as digital preservation, it cannot save what is not accounted for, what is not described properly, and what has not been documented.
abstract_fr: >
  This essay ...
abstract_es: >
  Este artículo analiza la digitalización del periódico histórico *Barbados Mercury Gazette* (1783-1848) y su potencial para la investigación y la enseñanza histórica. El periódico ilumina aspectos de la vida cotidiana bajo una realidad colonial distópica. Más que un \"producto terminado,\" la digitalización de la gaceta es un comienzo. El objetivo del proyecto no es simplemente facilitar la lectura de la gaceta en formato digital; si fuese así, la digitalización correría el riesgo de reproducir y reinscribir desigualdades, silencios y exclusiones. El objetivo es involucrar a los usuarios, particularmente a los barbadenses, en la investigación de sus ancestros esclavizados. Al mismo tiempo, el artículo reflexiona sobre el significado de la digitalización en entornos poscoloniales en el Sur global y los desafíos que surgen en la intersección del acceso y la conservación. Si bien la digitalización se promueve como preservación digital, no puede salvar lo que no se tiene en cuenta, lo que no se describe correctamente y lo que no se ha documentado.
language: en
---


The *Barbados Mercury and Bridgetown Gazette* (henceforth, the
*Mercury*) was digitized in 2018 at the Barbados Archives.[^1]
Digitization was funded through an Endangered Archives Programme (EAP)
grant by the British Library.[^2] The award, the first of its kind for
Barbados, was the result of an international collaboration between
scholars and practitioners in Barbados, the United States, and Canada.
Three people came together to make this project happen: Lissa Paul,
Brock University, who during her own research trips to Barbados
recognized the importance of the newspaper as a source of information
about the enslaved and was alarmed at the rate at which the microfilmed
copies she was using were deteriorating;[^3] Ingrid Thompson, director
of the Barbados Archives, who provided permission for digitization as
well as space and staff time as in-kind support; and Amalia S. Levi,
who, as an archivist conducting archival processing and digitization
projects in Barbados, had been involved with the Barbados Archives. The
catalyst for this serendipitous collaboration was Laurie Taylor, the
digital scholarship director of the [Digital Library of the
Caribbean](https://dloc.com/) (dLOC), who knew each person individually
and recognized the opportunity for digital preservation of this
important primary source.[^4]

As a primary source covering the period from 1783 to 1848, the *Mercury*
offers a sweeping view of every aspect of life in a British colony in
the Caribbean during the eighteenth and nineteenth centuries. These were
formative decades for the island, leading up to and following the 1816
slave rebellion led by the African-born slave Bussa. Although the
rebellion was quickly put down, it was part of a series of rebellions in
the West Indies during the nineteenth century that led to the abolition
of slavery in British colonies in 1834.

{% include image.html  
    img="issue04/levi-inness/LeviFig1.png"  
    caption="Figure 1. A pristine issue of the *Barbados Mercury Gazette*, 5 August 1815." %}

Scholars have mined the newspaper for information covering many
different arenas, including maritime history, economic history, military
history, social and cultural history, material culture, and geography.
The newspaper has been especially useful in reconstructing this period
in the island's slave society and economy, since sources that otherwise
would provide insight—such as a full catalogue of plantation records or
parish or local government records—are not readily available.[^5]

Among other information contained in the newspaper's pages, of
particular importance are the \"runaway slave\" ads, which appear
regularly. We usually find precious little descriptive information about
the enslaved in archives because their lives were rarely recorded; when
the enslaved do appear, they were enumerated or appraised as
commodities. These ads thus offer a relatively rich trove of information
about individual people, including his or her name, age, physical
appearance, skin color, clothing, accent, distinguishing features (such
as body modifications from his or her country of origin or signs of
violence that had resulted in bodily harm), friends, relatives, and
skills.

## Overview: The Digitization of the Mercury

The digitization project entailed roughly three phases: (a) the planning
phase, during which we worked through project logistics and also
organized a workshop to introduce the project and to involve local
heritage professionals in contextualizing the *Mercury*; (b) the
training phase, during which local personnel were provided with
professional development under the guidance of a University of Florida
technical team, part of the grant's stipulation for local capacity
building; and (c) the execution phase, during which we digitized the
*Mercury* in accordance with the EAP guidelines and organized an event
to formally launch the digitized project.[^6]

In total, twenty volumes—covering twenty-eight years between 1783 and
1848 and including 2,333 issues with four pages per issue—were digitized
at three hundred dots per inch. This work resulted in nine thousand
digital images at approximately 103 megabytes each, for a total of 1
terabyte of data. We produced an Excel spreadsheet with nearly three
thousand lines of metadata describing the newspaper at the collection
level, as a whole, and at the series level, considering each year as a
series.

The EAP follows the post-custodial archival model, meaning that physical
custody of the *Mercury* remained with the Barbados Archives.[^7] After
digitization, three sets of archival masters were produced in three
external hard drives: one drive is stored at the Barbados Archives, one
was sent to the EAP at the British Library, and one set was sent to the
Digital Library of the Caribbean.[^8]

## Endangered Archives in Postcolonial Settings

Recent natural disasters, such as the 2010 earthquake in Haiti, and
catastrophic hurricanes, such as María in 2017, make clear that the
severe effects of climate change have become the new reality.
Furthermore, manmade disasters, such as the destruction of the National
Museum of Brazil on 2 September 2018, demonstrated how easy it is for a
nation to lose its history in flames in a matter of minutes.[^9] Before
that, on 25 March 2018, a fire had destroyed nearby St. Lucia's Folk
Research Center. Within the structure, according to local press, was
\"the most extensive collection of the island's cultural artefacts and
history,\" proving that institutions, particularly in the Caribbean, are
highly vulnerable to such disasters and the value of their collections
is only realized once they have been lost.[^10]

In many instances, digitization projects are conducted in adverse or
dangerous conditions on the ground (ranging from political unrest to
lack of basic necessities) created by natural or manmade disasters. Such
projects can seem like a race against time. For example, many of the
records digitally preserved by the [Slave Societies Digital
Archive](https://www.slavesocieties.org/) (formerly the Archive of the
Ecclesiastical and Secular Sources for Slave Societies) have been
damaged considerably, while others have disappeared, having been either
misplaced or stolen.[^11] Often, because of emergency conditions or
funding availability, such rapid \"guerilla digitization\" necessarily
prioritizes access and digital capture over conservation.[^12]

Digitization has been endorsed as an accepted preservation reformatting
option by various professional organizations for a range of materials,
including newspapers.[^13] Many, though, have lamented the fact that
reformatting of historical newspapers through microfilming or
digitization frequently has been seen as an opportunity to destroy the
hard copies afterward.[^14] Others have criticized this tendency to
romanticize physical newspapers that disregards the notion of
selectivity because of tangible reasons, such as funding, preservation,
and space.[^15] However, it has been proven that original newspapers
still retain their importance as master copies for generating better
reproductions as technology and scholarly expectations change; for
regenerating copies in case of corrupted digital or microfilm copies;
for correcting faulty copies; or for supporting historical research
regarding the materiality of the newspaper, its usage, and its
production techniques.[^16]

As important as such digital resources are for access, they must be
managed within a conservation plan for often-decaying records.
Digitization itself cannot save what is not protected. When researchers
access the *Mercury*'s pages on either DLoC or the British Library
website, researchers are opening seemingly pristine and enhanced images.
Stripped from their materiality during the digitization process, they
are now a far cry from the original documents, which are extremely
fragile and vulnerable to adverse environmental conditions. Moreover, in
small countries with still developing economies like Barbados (which is
currently undergoing a prolonged economic recession), there is not
enough funding for the staffing of cultural institutions like the
archives, let alone for costly conservation measures, which usually
involve expensive and slow conservation work done locally or the equally
expensive strategies of either bringing in expert conservators or
sending documents for conservation overseas.

Many regional archives do not have any digitization policies at all, let
alone digitization policies that include conservation. Digitization
helps to provide wider access to these documents if available on
websites or digital platforms, which helps archivists to prevent overuse
of fragile materials. But digitization is not conservation. And
unfortunately, some policymakers (not trained archivists) believe that
digital records can replace original records, hence that digitization
represents a cost savings to archives and libraries in terms of storage
and conservation.[^17]

Funding for digitization that focuses on digital reformatting of
originals and online access without funding for the conservation needs
of the physical copies presents an additional question to regional
recipients of funding—though the archive is now accessible, is it truly
no longer endangered?

Archives in postcolonial contexts are endangered because there has not
been enough investment in policy, human resources, or conservation
strategies to maintain these records on the part of governments and
memory institutions. Furthermore, by funding short-term, temporary work
in return for shared access to digital copies, post-custodial
digitization grants made available by institutions in the global North
end up \"replicating or enabling the neoliberal structures of
transnational inequality,\" thus \"reifying a neoliberal North-South power
imbalance.\"[^18]

Therefore, in addition to funding digital projects, policies to support
conservation alongside digitization should also be a part of these
grants. Such support should also be extended to digitized files.
Digitization itself is not a panacea if robust digital preservation
protocols and processes are not in place. Digitized collections can be
effective for disaster preparedness and mitigation only if the long-term
preservation of files and associated metadata can be ensured through
infrastructures, such as digital archives, digital libraries, and
digital repositories embedded in robust communities.[^19] Such
communities can come together in case of disasters to support each other
by sharing resources and aiding to retrieve lost physical materials.

The advocacy for these policies and movement for investment in archives
is also a space for which we see graduates of the Department of History
and Philosophy at the University of the West Indies (UWI), Cave Hill
Campus, playing a role, since a number of them will go on to work in
policymaking branches of government as educators or archivists, as
information managers, and perhaps even as conservators.

## Reflections on the Digitization Process

Digitization of the *Mercury* allowed us to come into close contact with
the archival material, its informational content, and the materiality of
the medium. Although we had to keep to a specific timeline with respect
to the deliverables of the project, it was impossible for our eyes not
to linger on news and announcements that reflected the dystopian reality
of the slave society from which the materials emerged. It was also
impossible not to interact in a very physical way with the vulnerability
of these records: their fragile pages, the pieces that flew through the
air or accumulated on the floor, often disintegrating despite our
efforts to handle them properly.[^20]

{% include image.html  
    img="issue04/levi-inness/LeviFig2.png"
    caption="Figure 2. Dust and pieces of paper—the remains of digitization. Photo credit: Lenora Williams" %}

Beyond the technical scope of the project, then, digitization, as a
process, allowed us to reflect on its many facets.

### Digitization as collaboration

As an international project, our work on the *Mercury* gave us the
opportunity to learn a number of crucial lessons. Collaboration is a
balancing act that requires all parties to be clear about, define, and
adhere to expectations and to navigate different perspectives—both
cultural and professional. The process was guided by a series of small
workshops with local historians, policymakers and archivists,
librarians, and museum practitioners. The aim of these workshops was to
share details about the project but also to begin to shape ideas for
future projects and to discuss the role digitization can play in the
development of national archives.[^21]

These workshops provided fertile ground for historians, some of whom had
never previously had unobstructed access to the newspaper because of its
fragile condition and access restrictions; they immediately established
the importance of the project within a historical and scholarly context.
Policymakers started to understand the value of these records not only
as tools for research into the formation of Barbadian identity and
social history but also as a way of bolstering academic, educational,
and genealogical tourism, which have become a major focus of
niche-tourism market development in the island. Academic and
genealogical visitors tend to stay longer in the island, increasing
visitor expenditure, and tend to become repeat visitors. The workshops
also gave the archivists and information managers an opportunity to
share the challenges they faced in a resource-scarce environment and to
establish the centrality of their own roles in the development of
policies and programs around the island's documentary heritage.

On the whole, all participants were able to explore the documents
together and to recognize the importance of increased accessibility to
these documents through digitization as a means of enhancing their
visibility and creating research projects that increase public awareness
vis-à-vis the national significance of archives and libraries.

An additional academic-oriented workshop featured a representative from
the Digital Library of the Caribbean, one of the final repositories for
the digitized *Mercury* files. Its goal was to introduce students,
teachers/academics, and the community to other potential digital tools
and thereby to enhance student learning via exposure to digital skills
and media literacy.

{% include image.html  
    img="issue04/levi-inness/LeviFig3.png"
    caption="Figure 3. Workshop participants engaging with the print copies of the *Mercury*, 12 December 2017. Photo credit: Lenora Williams" %}

### Digitization as preservation

Adverse environmental conditions and decades of improper storage prior
to its arrival at the Barbados Archives in the early 1970s had left the
*Mercury* in a state of tremendous decay, despite the current
air-conditioned storage conditions. Our aim in digitizing the paper was
to accomplish the critical work of storing its informational content
(print) as well as to preserve a snapshot of how the *Mercury* looked at
a particular moment in time. During digitization, the *Mercury* volumes
were unbound to facilitate work without placing stress on the pages. The
grant itself does not provide for extensive conservation work;
therefore, at the end of the digitization process, pages were not
rebound but were carefully wrapped by Conservation Department staff with
the aim of storing them properly.

{% include image.html  
    img="issue04/levi-inness/LeviFig4.png"  
    caption="Figure 4. Disbinding the *Mercury* in the Conservation Department, Barbados Archives. Photo credit: Lenora Williams" %}

Given the newspaper's fragile state, since making the images freely
available online the Barbados Archives has restricted access to the
physical copies to prevent further damage.

### Digitization as destruction and reconstruction

The digitization process inadvertently involved destruction. While some
volumes were in good condition, others proved particularly challenging:
some pages were in pieces and were either brought together by the
conservators or had to be reconstructed on the copy stand before being
digitized. We had to work very carefully with the material, since some
would disintegrate on touch. The Conservation Department staff
demonstrated safe handling of the material to the digitization team, and
every effort was made to proceed without damaging the material. At once
frustrated and mesmerized by the specks of dust and paper collecting on
the floor around us, we were well aware that we were the last people who
would touch the physical copies of the *Mercury*.[^22]

{% include image.html  
    img="issue04/levi-inness/LeviFig5.png"  
    caption="Figure 5. A puzzle of disintegrating pages. Photo credit: Lenora Williams" %}

### Digitization as communication

Through regular postings on Twitter, we found a community of people with
whom we shared surprising findings, sad stories, or the frustration of
working with the fragile material. We posted, and interacted with
people, about bugs that we found desiccated among the pages of the
newspaper; intricate trails left by the pests who had eaten away at the
pages; and unexpected findings, such as a random piece of ribbon resting
over an advertisement for a shop importing ribbons, fabrics, and
hats.[^23] Such tweets resonated with scholars working with Caribbean
archives and reflected their experiences handling such documents. As an
example, on *Digital Cultural Heritage Cluster* Nathan Dize wrote about
the precarity of the archival material and the poetics of the trails of
burrowing pests that transform documents over time, \"creating new layers
of meaning and sensation.\"[^24] However, the tweets with the greatest
impact were those we posted of runaway-slave ads, which contained
stories of violence, of course, but also of courage and liberation.

{% include image.html
  img="issue04/levi-inness/LeviFig6.jpg"
  caption="Figure 6. Unexpected marginalia: a bug. Photo credit: Amalia Levi" %}

{% include image.html
  img="issue04/levi-inness/LeviFig7.jpg"
  caption="Figure 7. Trails made by hungry, wandering bookworms. Photo credit: Amalia Levi" %}

## Beyond Digitization

Handling and interacting closely with the physical copies of the
*Mercury* underlined the importance of care for collections.
Digitization is useful for promoting access and limiting handling of
material; however, it is in many ways secondary to conservation.
Digitization cannot save what is not accounted for, what is not
described properly, and what has not been documented. For archivists and
librarians, the primary responsibility must be the safeguarding of our
collections.

Safeguarding collections has two aspects: (a) the physical preservation
of these documents, which involves establishing correct environmental
conditions, housing material in proper conditions, protecting against
fire, safeguarding against natural disasters, and physically controlling
items in the collection; and (b) the process of inventorying, which
entails providing detailed and accurate descriptions that facilitate
access to and retrieval of collections.

Having good descriptions in place allows us to have intellectual control
over our collections, promote access to our material, and increase
contextualization of the records by providing historical insight about
their value and links to other items in our institution or other
institutions. More importantly, in the case of disasters, it helps us
have good documentation and representation of what was there and offers
the possibility to reconstruct it, even if partially.[^25]

All digitization is necessarily selective, and some items are
prioritized over others, based on funding or institutional goals.
Digitization is usually seen by funding agencies as the \"sexy\" aspect of
archival projects and is much easier to fund, while other vital aspects
of archival work—like creating descriptions and inventories, providing
proper storage, and doing the labor-intensive and expensive work of
conservation—are neglected.

Digitization inevitably results in loss of information. The process of
scanning materials produces digital images that obscure the materiality
of the items and risks conflating the multitude of voices within them.
Metadata created during digitization usually favor the \"creator\" of a
collection, and with limited to no possibility to search the images,
marginalized populations remain obscured and difficult to find.

Considering that all digitization involves selection, collections that
are \"most used\" or belong to \"important people\" may end up prioritized
for digitization. Such collections usually represent dominant voices—in
the case of colonial societies, the voices of the white class of
planters, merchants, and colonial authorities. Digitization that does
not take this into consideration risks elevating and promoting access to
such voices and thus contributing to the reproduction and amplification
of the very colonial logics and worldviews we mean to avoid.

## Decolonizing the Record: The Case Study of the Barbados Mercury Gazette

To mitigate the challenges of digitization, we aim to contribute to
decolonizing the archival record about the enslaved in Barbados, using
the *Mercury* as a starting point for several initiatives. We are doing
so in a purposeful, conscious way that strives to overcome the gaps,
silences, and omissions either inherent in the colonial epistemologies
that the *Mercury* represents or created by the limitations of
digitization technology. Recent scholarship about the enslaved has shown
that it is possible to challenge the erasure of colonial archival
sources and seek out interdisciplinary methodologies to help tease out
information about the enslaved that might seem absent.[^26]

### Extracting information 

Despite the proliferation of digitization efforts, \"cultural heritage
institutions have rarely built digital collections or designed access
with the aim to support computational use.\"[^27] Developing and
providing access to the digitized *Mercury* images as data is crucial
for retrospectively creating a body of information about the enslaved
that can potentially be computationally malleable.

#### Optical character recognition (OCR)

One way to extract information from digitized images is through OCR, as
recent work with digitized newspapers has shown.[^28] However, we had
bad results when we OCR'ed sample pages from the *Mercury* because of
the acidity of the paper and the unevenness of the color.[^29] We plan
to try handwritten recognition engines (e.g., Transkribus), which have
worked well in a similar case, in the hope that this might produce
better results.[^30]

#### The Barbados Runaway Slaves Digital Collection project

In March 2019, a new collaboration between the Barbados Archives and the
[Early Caribbean Digital
Archive](file:///C:\Users\willo\Downloads\ecda.northeastern.edu)
resulted in initiating the Barbados Runaway Slaves Digital Collection
project.[^31] The collaboration was officially launched through a series
of workshops and events in May 2019 that served to introduce the project
and engage the public.[^32] These initial workshops were followed by
monthly workshops during fall and winter 2019.[^33]

The aim of this initiative is to extract runaway-slave ads, transcribe
the text, and enrich the human stories in each ad with additional
contextual information. At a later stage, we hope to be able to input
the information from the ads into a database.

At the outset, we were committed to engaging the public in this work
through regular monthly meetings. We felt that if we did not do so,
Barbadians would not be aware of this resource and the digitization of
the *Mercury* would end up being an extractive project. As was made
clear during the launch events, involving the public creates community
and incentivizes people to work together to research their history. This
is especially important for this project, given that many Barbadians are
not conscious of their enslaved past or of the ways their ancestors
contested and resisted slavery, as the very fact of these runaway-slave
ads affirms. Currently, there is very little formal or informal
discussion about the role of slavery in shaping the country's
development. History is not a mandatory subject through primary and
secondary school, and slave studies only comprise a relatively small
part of the overall curriculum.

It was, then, especially moving to see people interact with the archival
material during the launch events and with the digitized copies during
the subsequent workshops, and to witness their realization that these
materials could be a source of rich information for understanding the
Barbadian past. In a sense, we cannot understand the ads independently
from the people because in the postcolony, the community *is* the
archives.

{% include image.html
  img="issue04/levi-inness/LeviFig8.png"
  caption="Figure 8. \"Runaway-slave\" ad, 3 January 1789." %}

{% include image.html
  img="issue04/levi-inness/LeviFig9.png"
  caption="Figure 9. \"Runaway-slave\" ad, 27 January 1807." %}

{% include image.html
  img="issue04/levi-inness/LeviFig10.png"
  caption="Figure 10. \"Runaway-slave\" ad, 14 April 1807." %}

{% include image.html
  img="issue04/levi-inness/LeviFig11.png"
  caption="Figure 11. \"Runaway-slave\" ad, 4 October 1788." %}

{% include image.html
  img="issue04/levi-inness/LeviFig12.png"
  caption="Figure 12. \"Runaway-slave\" ad, 30 August 1783." %}

{% include image.html
  img="issue04/levi-inness/LeviFig13.png"
  caption="Figure 13. \"Runaway-slave\" ad, 14 April 1807." %}

Participants in the workshops saw vivid, human stories that provided
descriptions of and gave a voice to voiceless ancestors. By engaging
with these ads, participants could discuss past traumas and even
acknowledge the triumphs of enslaved runaways in their quest to
challenge the authority of enslavers. This kind of resistance is not
fully appreciated by younger Barbadians who have often been told by
older generations, that is, by Barbadians who did not have the benefit
of a postcolonial education, that their enslaved ancestors were less
rebellious than in other slave societies.[^34] Sharing these stories
creates dialogue and allows people to speak about a past that is often
shunned or avoided in the present.

An important part of this work will be to fill the gaps in the records.
There are aspects of slave society that the ads reveal to us, and there
are other aspects that they imply or that we can infer from the context.
But much remains incomplete or unknown. We may, however, be able to
speculate and creatively try to understand what is not there. This is
critical during the process of extracting data from the information in
the *Mercury*. Lest we think that data are an objective, accurate
representation of reality, we must remember, as Jessica Marie Johnson
forcefully contends,

> There is no bloodless data in slavery's archive. Data is the
evidence of terror, and the idea of data as fundamental & objective
information...obscures rather than reveals the scene of the crime.[^35]

The Barbados Runaway Slaves Digital Collection remains a relatively new
venture, and there is still a great deal of work to be done,
particularly because the Barbados Archives holds a wealth of information
(plantation records, wills, slave registers, etc.) that can be used to
contextualize the ad information and disambiguate individuals. The
collection can also be usefully cross-referenced with other digitized
archival sources globally, such as the [*Slave
Voyages*](http://www.slavevoyages.org) database or the University
College of London's [*Legacies of British Slave
Ownership*](http://www.ucl.ac.uk/lbs) database. Eventually it might be
possible to become part of larger initiatives like the [*Enslaved: The
People of the Historic Slave Trade*](http://enslaved.org/) project,
which aims to bring together data about the people who took part in the
slave trade across disparate projects and institutions, and to allow
people to search across multiple databases.[^36]

### Promote use in digital humanities projects

We hope that extracting information and data from the *Mercury* will
promote its use for digital humanities projects. The information
contained in the *Mercury* can be of use to many different disciplines.
It can also form the basis for student projects. Below are some ways
scholars and researchers might interact with the *Mercury* using digital
tools:

As the [*Jesuit Plantation
Project*](https://jesuitplantationproject.org/s/jpp/page/welcome) shows,
it is possible to infer relationships and extract networks of people
even when explicit information is lacking, or when the individuals do
not have last names, particularly when enriching this information with
geographical linked data.[^37] The *Mercury* offers a veritable treasure
trove of human characters and stories, particularly through the
runaway-slave ads, and we hope that scholars will be able to work to
bring these lives to light, particularly when other available archival
material might be scattered or inaccessible, as is the case with
colonial records.

The *Mercury* offers great opportunities for creating spatial
humanities projects. It is full of movement—of people, goods, ideas, and
transportation methods. Considering that the newspaper was a knowledge
infrastructure and informational tool for the planter and merchant
class, it contains a wealth of information about ships arriving or
departing; sales of goods on the island; and news from Europe or other
colonies (in the Caribbean or North America). The *Mercury* was also an
implacable tool for the relentless pursue of lost property, that is, the
enslaved human beings who managed to escape from bondage. These ads
offer incredibly rich geographical information, since their aim was to
find and apprehend these individuals and to point to all possible
locations where they might be in hiding. Projects like [*Slave Revolt in
Jamaica*](http://revolt.axismaps.com/) or [*Mapping
Marronage*](http://mapping-marronage.rll.lsa.umich.edu/welcome) prove
that seeing geographical information in a holistic way can reveal
patterns of movement, escape, resistance, and organization.[^38]

The *Mercury* also provides a vivid picture of Bridgetown; its
shops, workplaces, houses, and port; and the people inhabiting and
working in these places. As an example, ads about shops and the goods
they imported and sold can form the basis of an augmented reality
application that would overlay present-day locations with their
historical antecedents. Geolocated ads can also help tell stories using
layers of the island's past, as with the example of [*Layers of
London*](http://www.layersoflondon.org).[^39]

Considering both changes in the island's urban landscape after the
nineteenth century, and especially after Barbados gained its
independence in 1966, and the continuous use of old pathways and
locations, the *Mercury* can be a great source of geographical
information. Such information pertains to locations on the island and to
\"waterways\" that underpinned transportation in the Atlantic world. Not
only does the gazette contain location information about shops or
houses, it also faithfully notes the goings and comings of all ships
departing from or arriving to the island. Working with and enriching
such geographical information with Linked Open Data can form the basis
for a Barbados-specific gazetteer that in turn can become a pilot
project for a gazetteer for the English-speaking Caribbean. This
gazetteer could complement the *LatAm Gazetteer of Colonial Latin
America* being developed under the aegis of the Pelagios project.[^40]

### The *Mercury* as a teaching tool

The Department of History and Philosophy at the University of the West
Indies (UWI), Cave Hill Campus has increasingly been looking at digital
humanities scholarship and methodologies as a way of engaging students
in primary source research, while also improving their digital skills
and literacy.

A recent Caribbean Examinations Council Task Force on History report
examined the decline in Caribbean Secondary Examination
Certificate–level and Caribbean Advanced Examination Certificate–level
history registrants over the last decade or more.[^41] The task force
investigated a number of factors for the decline and made
recommendations, but the factors largely revolved around competition
with other new, seemingly career-ready subjects (e.g., business studies,
information technology, animation, and gaming and tourism) and a lack of
knowledge by students and parents concerning the transferable and
employable skills gained in a subject like history.

Some of the recommendations made included using history to teach other
subjects, especially those requiring digital literacy skills (including
the perceived career-ready subjects mentioned above), as well as to
demonstrate how history could be represented using technology to make it
more relevant and accessible to students across the region. University
lecturers have been cognizant of the decline for a number of years, so
opportunities to get involved in digital history projects, including the
*Mercury* newspaper and associated projects through the Digital Library
of the Caribbean and Northeastern University's *Early Caribbean Digital
Archive* through the Slave Runaway Project, have allowed students and
graduates of the UWI History Department to be a part of the digital
application of their historical skills. Students are not only using the
repositories in their courses but also helping to build associated
databases as projects for their assessments. There are also
opportunities for students at both the undergraduate and postgraduate
levels to use digital resources as part of their thesis projects.

Some of the student participants involved in the most recent workshops
immediately recognized how their historical skills can be applied to
\"reading between the lines\" of the runaway ads that were transcribed in
the workshop. The sessions help to reinforce students' confidence in the
historical skills they are acquiring, while also making these skills
relevant to practical project work.[^42] Moreover, recent graduates of
the undergraduate and postgraduate degree programs in history and
heritage studies are being employed to assist archivists with the
completion of digitization projects, thereby demonstrating (to
themselves and to their parents) the importance of digital history
skills in the workplace.

## Challenging Narratives, Reclaiming Ancestral Voices

The digitization of the *Barbados Mercury Gazette* has great potential
for research projects that can aid students and other researchers to
better understand their history. The examples that stand out are the
numerous runaway ads in almost every edition of the paper until the end
of slavery. These ads in particular help to contest the popular
narrative of Barbadian acquiescence to slavery; they help to reconstruct
the family and community networks that were important to enslaved
Barbadians; and they help to give enslaved and free ancestors a voice,
whereas the intent of these records was to leave them voiceless. That
said, the potential inherent in a now readily accessible and (hopefully)
free archive will depend on public and community engagement and on the
creation of participatory projects among students and educators,
particularly at the secondary and tertiary levels in the region. The
more sources that become available, the more promise there is to move
this information and its analysis out of the realm of academic
scholarship and into the classroom for students and communities. This
kind of development would allow archives to break free of the stratified
colonial silences and privilege-based voids in access. It would allow
archives to become spaces for community development, capacity building,
social consciousness, and social justice—but only if we invest in their
preservation in the first place. If archival documents are merely
digitized and uploaded online with no commitment to conservation,
programming, and engagement, then the colonized legacy of archives
remains locked in the patterns and hierarchies of the past—invisible in
HTML (hypertext markup language) code on websites unexplored by the
people who need them the most.

---

[^1]: The title of the newspaper changed throughout the years, beginning
    in 1783 as the *Barbados Mercury* and changing to the *Barbados
    Mercury and Bridgetown Gazette* circa 1805. For more contextual
    information about the history of the newspaper, please see \"The
    *Barbados Mercury and Bridgetown Gazette* Newspaper Collection,\"
    British Library Endangered Archives Programme,
    <http://eap.bl.uk/collection/EAP1086-1>.

[^2]: See \"Welcome to the Endangered Archives Programme,\"
    <https://eap.bl.uk>. Established in 2004, the EAP awards grants for
    identifying and digitizing culturally important \"material that is at
    risk of loss or decay, and is located in countries where resources
    and opportunities to preserve such material are lacking or limited\"
    (\"About the Programme,\" <https://eap.bl.uk/about>). The EAP makes
    available digitized material through local partners and its website.

[^3]: See Heather Junke, \"Brock Prof Part of International Mission to
    Save Caribbean History,\" *The Brock News, a News Source for Brock
    University*, 25 October 2017,
    <http://brocku.ca/brock-news/2017/10/brock-prof-part-of-international-mission-to-save-caribbean-history>,
    accessed 15 December 2019.

[^4]: To learn more about the collaboration, see \"Collaboration across
    Disciplines to Make a Path Where None Existed\" (panel presented at
    ACURIL 2017: Multidisciplinary Research in the Caribbean, 4–8 June
    2017, San Juan, Puerto Rico),
    [dloc.com/AA00054636/00001/citation](https://dloc.com/AA00054636/00001/citation).
    ACURIL is the Association of Caribbean University, Research, and
    Institutional Libraries.

[^5]: See Jerome S. Handler, *A Guide to Source Materials for the Study
    of Barbados History, 1627–1834* (Carbondale: Southern Illinois
    University Press, 1971).

[^6]: To learn more about each phase, see Amalia S. Levi, \"Digitisation
    of the *Barbados Mercury Gazette*,\" *Endangered Archives Blog*, 3
    August 2018,
    <http://blogs.bl.uk/endangeredarchives/2018/08/digitisation-of-the-barbados-mercury-gazette.html>.

[^7]: See Maja Kominko, \"Crumb Trails, Threads, and Traces: Endangered
    Archives and History,\" in *From Dust to Digital: Ten Years of the
    Endangered Archives Programme*, ed. Maja Kominko (Cambridge: Open
    Book, 2016), xlix–lxviii, <http://books.openedition.org/obp/2216>.
    To read more about the post-custodial model, see Christian Kelleher,
    \"Archives without Archives: (Re)Locating and (Re)Defining the
    Archive through Post-Custodial Praxis,\" *Journal of Critical Library
    and Information Studies* 1, no. 2 (2017),
    [doi:10.24242/jclis.v1i2.29](http://doi.org/10.24242/jclis.v1i2.29).

[^8]: The *Mercury* online can be accessed either through the EAP portal
    at <http://eap.bl.uk/project/EAP1086> or through the dLOC portal at
    <http://www.ufdc.ufl.edu/AA00047511/02334/allvolumes>.

[^9]: Hugh Eakin, \"We're All in Danger of Watching Our History Go Up in
    Flames,\" *Washington Post*, 5 September 2018,
    <http://www.washingtonpost.com/opinions/our-art-has-burned-for-centuries-it-will-go-up-in-smoke-again/2018/09/05/53702182-b11b-11e8-a20b-5f4f84429666_story.html>.

[^10]: \"Fire Destroys Building Housing St. Lucia's Most Extensive
    Collection of Cultural and Historical Artefacts,\" *Pride News*
    (blog), 27 March 2018,
    <http://pridenews.ca/2018/03/27/fire-destroys-building-housing-st-lucias-extensive-collection-cultural-historical-artefacts/>.

[^11]: See \"About the Archive,\" *Slave Societies Digital Archive*,
    [www.slavesocieties.org/node/23](file:///D:\Willow\sx%20archipelagos\sxa4%20Jan%202020\returned%20Word%20edits\www.slavesocieties.org\node\23)
    (accessed 14 December 2019).

[^12]: Angela Sutton, \"The Digital Overhaul of the Archive of
    Ecclesiastical and Secular Sources for Slave Societies (ESSSS),\" *sx
    archipelagos*, no. 2 (July 2017),
    <http://smallaxe.net/sxarchipelagos/issue02/essss.html>.

[^13]: See Kathleen Arthur et al., \"Recognizing Digitization as a
    Preservation Reformatting Method,\" *Microform and Imaging Review*
    33, no. 4 (2004): 171–80.

[^14]: See Nicholson Baker, \"Discards,\" *New Yorker*, 4 April 1994,
    <https://www.newyorker.com/magazine/1994/04/04/discards>.

[^15]: Richard J. Cox, \"The Great Newspaper Caper: Backlash in the
    Digital Age,\" *First Monday*, 4 December 2000,
    [doi:10.5210/fm.v5i12.822](https://doi.org/10.5210/fm.v5i12.822).

[^16]: See Randy Silverman, \"Retaining Hardcopy Papers Still Important
    in Digital Age,\" *Newspaper Research Journal* 36, no. 3 (2015):
    363–72,
    [doi:10.1177/0739532915600749](https://doi.org/10.1177/0739532915600749).

[^17]: Recent government initiatives in Barbados suggest that there is a
    move to digitize public records on a large scale with the help of
    Inter-American Development Bank (IDB) funding. However, it is not
    clear how this policy will dovetail with a larger conservation
    policy. See Emmanuel Joseph, \"PM: I'm Sorry,\" *Barbados Today*, 23
    October 2018, <http://barbadostoday.bb/2018/10/23/pm-im-sorry>.

[^18]: Hannah Alpert-Abrams, David A. Bliss, and Itza Carbajal,
    \"Post-Custodialism for the Collective Good: Examining Neoliberalism
    in US-Latin American Archival Partnerships,\" in \"Evidences,
    Implications, and Critical Interrogations of Neoliberalism in
    Information Studies,\" ed. Marika Cifor and Jamie A. Lee, special
    issue, *Journal of Critical Library and Information Studies* 2, no.
    1 (2019),
    [doi:10.24242/jclis.v2i1.87](https://doi.org/10.24242/jclis.v2i1.87).

[^19]: Brooke Wooldridge and Laurie Taylor, \"The Role of Digital
    Libraries in Disaster Preparedness and Mitigation\" (paper presented
    at ACURIL 2011: The Role of Libraries and Archives in Disaster
    Preparedness, Response, and Research, 30 May–3 June 2011, University
    of South Florida, Tampa),
    <http://scholarcommons.usf.edu/cgi/viewcontent.cgi?article=1015&context=acuril_2011>.

[^20]: For more on the process through the thoughts of the digitization
    team, see Brian Inniss and Lenora Williams, \"The *Barbados Mercury*:
    Thoughts from the Digitisation Team,\" *Endangered Archives Blog*, 19
    March 2019,
    <https://blogs.bl.uk/endangeredarchives/2019/03/digitising-the-barbados-mercury-.html>.

[^21]: For more information about the workshops, see \"The *Barbados
    Mercury Gazette* Digitization Launch Workshop—December 12, 2017,\"
    <https://dloc.com/AA00061880/00001/citation>; \"The *Barbados Mercury
    Gazette* Digitization Training Workshop,\"
    [https://dloc.com/AA00063750/00001/citation](%20https:/dloc.com/AA00063750/00001/citation);
    and \"The *Barbados Mercury Gazette*: Event to Celebrate the Launch
    of the Newspaper Online,\"
    <https://dloc.com/AA00066602/00001/citation>.

[^22]: Amalia Skarlatou Levi (@amaliasl), \"We digitize and we destroy.
    We put together a puzzle that will never exist again. The pieces and
    the dust as embodiment of the necessity and inevitability of it all.
    // Some more spoils of \#digitization, volume 1812 of the
    \#BarbadosMercury @bl\_eap,\" Twitter, 15 November 2018, 11:3 am,
    <https://twitter.com/amaliasl/status/1063152517075353600>.

[^23]: Read project posts on Twitter through the hashtag
    \#BarbadosMercury.

[^24]: Nathan H. Dize, \"Aphids and Digital Archives: Thinking through
    Digital Preservation with Dionne Brand's *The Blue Clerk*,\" *Digital
    Cultural Heritage Cluster*, Vanderbilt University, 13 October 2018,
    <http://my.vanderbilt.edu/digitalculturalheritage/2018/10/13/aphids-and-digital-archives-thinking-through-digital-preservation-with-dionne-brands-the-blue-clerk>.

[^25]: See, for example, *Beyond 2022: Ireland's Virtual Records
    Treasury*, which aims to recreate the Public Record Office of
    Ireland that was destroyed by fire in 1922, <http://beyond2022.ie>.

[^26]: See, for example, Marisa J. Fuentes, *Dispossessed Lives:
    Enslaved Women, Violence, and the Archive* (Philadelphia: University
    of Pennsylvania Press, 2018).

[^27]: Always Already Computational: Collections as Data project team,
    \"The Santa Barbara Statement on Collections as Data,\" version 2,
    <http://collectionsasdata.github.io/statement/> (accessed 6 July
    2019).

[^28]: One such collection provided as data is the *Gaceta de la Habana*
    at the University of Miami Libraries; see
    <http://github.com/UMiamiLibraries/collections-as-data/tree/master/LaGaceta>.

[^29]: OCR was conducted with Prime Recognition.

[^30]: See Dario Kampkaspar, \"Digital Edition of the ‘Wienerisches
    Diarium,'\" November 2017,
    <http://read.transkribus.eu/wp-content/uploads/2017/07/Kampkaspar_Wienerisches_Diarium.pdf>.

[^31]: The *Early Caribbean Digital Archive* is an open-access digital
    archive, an online repository of documents, travel narratives,
    natural histories, novels, poetry, and maps from the sixteenth- to
    nineteenth-century Caribbean, which offers dynamic interactions with
    early Caribbean texts, a robust research community, and pedagogical
    and scholarly resources; see <http://ecda.northeastern.edu>. At the
    time of the writing of this article, the website of the Barbados
    Runaway Slaves Digital Collection project has not yet been
    finalized. Furthermore, the title of the digital collection is still
    tentative.

[^32]: Paula Harper-Grant, \"Barbados Has Digital Runaway Slaves
    Collection,\" *GIS* (blog), 13 March 2019,
    <http://gisbarbados.gov.bb/blog/barbados-has-digital-runaway-slaves-collection/>.

[^33]: To learn more about the workshops conducted during fall 2019,
    please see Amalia S. Levi, \"Beyond Digitisation: Engaging the
    Community around the *Barbados Mercury*,\" *Endangered Archives
    Blog*, 2 January 2020,
    <http://blogs.bl.uk/endangeredarchives/2020/01/beyond-digitisation-the-barbados-mercury.html>.

[^34]: For resistance strategies used among the enslaved in Barbados,
    the following sources provide more information: Hilary Beckles, \"An
    Economic Life of Their Own: Slaves as Commodity Producers and
    Distributors in Barbados,\" *Slavery and Abolition* 12, no. 1 (1991):
    31–47,
    [doi:10.1080/01440399108575021](https://doi.org/10.1080/01440399108575021);
    Hilary Beckles, \"Caribbean Anti-slavery: The Self-Liberation Ethos
    of Enslaved Blacks,\" in *Caribbean Slave Society and Economy*, ed.
    Hilary Beckles and Verene Shepherd (Kingston: Ian Randle, 1991); and
    Hilary Beckles, *Natural Rebels: A Social History of Enslaved Women
    in Barbados* (New Brunswick, NJ: Rutgers University Press, 1989).

[^35]: Jessica Marie Johnson, \"Markup Bodies: Black Life Studies and
    Slavery Death Studies at the Digital Crossroads,\" *Social Text*,
    no. 137 (December 2018): 57–79,
    [doi:10.1215/01642472-7145658](http://doi.org/10.1215/01642472-7145658).

[^36]: See *Slave Voyages*, <http://www.slavevoyages.org>; Legacies of
    British Slave-Ownership, <http://www.ucl.ac.uk/lbs>; and *Enslaved:
    The People of the Historic Slave Trade*, <http://www.enslaved.org>.

[^37]: See *Life and Labor under Slavery: The Jesuit Plantation
    Project*, <http://jesuitplantationproject.org/s/jpp/page/welcome>.

[^38]: See *Slave Revolt in Jamaica, 1760–1761*,
    <http://revolt.axismaps.com>; and *Mapping Marronage*,
    <http://mapping-marronage.rll.lsa.umich.edu/welcome>.

[^39]: See *Layers of London: Recording the Layers of London's Rich
    Heritage*, <http://www.layersoflondon.org>.

[^40]: Pelagios, \"Final Report on LatAm: A Historical Gazetteer of
    Colonial Latin America and the Caribbean,\" *Medium* (blog), 14 June
    2019,
    <http://medium.com/pelagios/final-report-on-latam-a-historical-gazetteer-of-colonial-latin-america-and-the-caribbean-4772c7eae9e2>.

[^41]: Caribbean Examinations Council, *Caribbean Examinations Council
    (CXC) Task Force on History Report* (Bridgetown, Barbados: Caribbean
    Examinations Council, 2018).

[^42]: One undergraduate student reflected, \"You can see how this
    session promotes the idea of critical analysis…and would engage and
    promote the desire to study history from the secondary school level.
    I believe that some effort should be made to promote digital
    humanities beyond the university\"; Tevin Maynard, e-mail to authors,
    20 May 2019. Another student mentioned how the exercise helped her
    to understand more about the lived experience of enslaved people in
    Barbados and the risks they took to challenge the system of slavery
    by running away and absenting themselves from slaveholders.
