---
layout: article
section: articles
title: 
  "long": "Thinking Digital: Archives and Glissant Studies in the Twenty-First Century"
  "short": "Thinking Digital"
doi: ""
author: 
- name: Jeanne Jégousso
  shortname: Jégousso
  bio: >
    Jeanne Jégousso is the cofounder and codirector of the *Library of Glissant Studies*. She is an assistant professor of French at Hollins University (VA), where she teaches francophone literatures and culture of the Caribbean and the Indian Ocean. She has published articles in the journal *Nouvelles Études Francophones* and in the books *La Louisiane et les Antilles, une nouvelle région du monde* (Presses Universitaires des Antilles, 2019) and *Édouard Glissant: L'éclat et l'obscur* (Presses Universitaires des Antilles, 2019). She is also a coeditor of the collection *Teaching, Reading, and Theorizing Caribbean Texts* (Lexington, forthcoming). She is a member of the board of the Centre international d'études Édouard Glissant, and she is currently working on her first book titled "La poétique du dépassement dans les littératures contemporaines des Antilles et de l'Océan Indien."
- name: Emily O'Dell
  shortname: O'Dell
  bio: >
    Emily O'Dell received her PhD from Louisiana State University and is currently an English lecturer at Georgia College. Her articles have been featured in *Postcolonial Interventions*, the *Louisiana Folklife Journal*, the *Louisiana Folklore Miscellany*, and *Atlantic Studies*, as well as in the collected volumes *La Louisiane et les Antilles, une nouvelle région du monde* (Presses Universitaires des Antilles, 2019) and *Utopia and Dystopia in the Age of Trump: Images from Literature and Visual Arts* (Rowman and Littlefield, 2019)*.* She is also a coeditor of the collection *Teaching, Reading, and Theorizing Caribbean Texts* (Lexington, forthcoming).
date: January, 2020
issue: 4
order: 4
abstract: >
  The *Library of Glissant Studies*, an open-access website, centralizes information by and on the work of Caribbean writer Édouard Glissant (Martinique, 1928--France, 2011). Endorsed by literary executors Sylvie and Mathieu Glissant, this multilingual, multimedia website provides bibliographic information, reproduces rare sources, connects numerous institutions, and includes the works of both renowned and emerging scholars in order to stimulate further research. The library chronicles all forms of academic work devoted to Glissant's writings, such as doctoral dissertations, MA theses, articles, books, and conference presentations. In this article, Jeanne Jégousso and Emily O'Dell address the origin, the evolution, and the challenges of the digital platform that was launched in March 2018.
abstract_fr: >
  The *Library of Glissant Studies* (« La bibliothèque des études glissantiennes ») a été conçue comme une base de donnée digitale et multilingue dédiée à l'accessibilité et à la large diffusion des textes de Glissant et des textes à propos de Glissant. L'objectif de notre projet est de préserver et de partager ces informations autour de l'œuvre et de la pensée de Glissant sur un site internet de libre accès, relié à de multiples archives physiques et digitales contenant des matériels imprimés et multimedia. A travers ce projet nous cherchons également à faciliter la collaboration académique grâce à l'inclusion de matériels en plusieurs langues provenant d'aires géographiques disparates tout en développant une esthétique et une structure qui reflètent les notions glissantiennes de « pensée archipélique », d'opacité et de Relation. Dans cet article, nous aborderons les questions herméneutiques que nous nous sommes posées durant les premières étapes de ce projet, et nous développerons la philosophie de recherche qui nous a guidées dans la conception et la fonctionnalité de cette plateforme en ligne. Nous évoquerons également la manière dont cette plateforme numérique a facilité l'échange transnational et translinguistique d'idées dans un contexte caribéen digital.
abstract_es: >
   La *Biblioteca de Estudios sobre Glissant*, un sitio web de acceso abierto, centraliza la información de y sobre el trabajo del escritor caribeño Édouard Glissant (Martinica, 1928 -- Francia, 2011). Avalado por los ejecutores literarios Sylvie y Mathieu Glissant, este sitio web multilingüe proporciona información bibliográfica, reproduce fuentes raras, conecta numerosas instituciones e incluye los trabajos de académicos reconocidos y emergentes con el fin de estimular una investigación más amplia sobre el escritor. La biblioteca incluye todas las formas de trabajo académico dedicado a los escritos de Glissant, como disertaciones doctorales, tesis de maestría, artículos, libros y presentaciones en conferencias. En este artículo, Jeanne Jégousso y Emily O'Dell abordan el origen, la evolución y los desafíos de la plataforma digital que se lanzó en marzo de 2018.
language: en
---

Martinican author Édouard Glissant (1928--2011) revolutionized
contemporary literary thought while providing new ways to theorize and
understand transnational exchanges thanks to his key notions of
Relation, developed in his 1990 *Poétique de la Relation* (*Poetics of
Relation*), and the *Tout-monde* (Whole-World), which was also the title
of his 1993 novel. Drawing from the diverse philosophical, poetic, and
oral traditions of Europe, Africa, and the Americas, Glissant questioned
and reconsidered the very notion of national boundaries and cultural
legacies in order to create a dialogue among civilizations across time
and geographic borders.

Toward the end of his life, Glissant became particularly preoccupied
with the continuation of the work that the Canadian scholar Alain Baudot
had completed in his *Bibliographie annotée d'Édouard Glissant*
(*Annotated Bibliography of Édouard Glissant*), which contains more than
thirteen hundred references and sixty illustrations pertaining to
Glissant's work and its criticism. However, because Baudot's
bibliography had been out of print since 1993, Glissant expressed the
need for a new project that would "poursuivre le travail d'Alain Baudot"
("continue Alain Baudot's work") and include the books, articles,
conference talks, interviews, newspaper clippings, and poems that
Glissant had written in the 1990s and 2000s.[^1] The resulting project
is the *Library of Glissant Studies*, a digital platform created by
Raphaël Lauro and Jeanne Jégousso dedicated to inspiring new research
and facilitating collaboration between scholars. In this article, we
address the inspiration behind and purpose of the *Library of Glissant
Studies*, as well as the hermeneutic questions that arose during the
first stages of this project and the research philosophy that led to the
design and functionality of the online platform.

The [*Library of Glissant Studies*](https://www.glissantstudies.com)
(*LoGS*) was designed as a digital bibliography dedicated to making
textual references by and about Édouard Glissant accessible and widely
available to readers, students, and scholars on every continent.[^2] The
objective of the project is to preserve and share information on
Glissant's work and thought in an open-access website and also to
facilitate scholarly collaboration by, on the one hand, including
materials in numerous languages from geographically disparate areas and
by, on the other, creating research groups in several institutions. It
is important to emphasize that although the majority of Glissant's work
was produced in French, the *Library of Glissant Studies* was not
designed or developed exclusively for French speakers and French
materials.

Instead, the team pays special attention to including all texts
pertaining to Glissant or his work in any language, which demonstrates
Glissant's theory formulated in his fifth essay of poetics, *La Cohée du
Lamentin*, that there is a "multirelation où toutes les langues du monde
. . . trament ensemble des chemins qui sont autant d'échos" ("a
multirelation where all the languages of the world . . . hatch together
paths that are as many echoes").[^3] In other words, the implementation
of this philosophy in the construction of the digital bibliography
supposes that the aggregation of languages will facilitate the emergence
of new research trends that will eventually resonate and influence one
another. In addition, Glissant writes in his 1981 essay *Le discours
antillais* that plurilingualism is one of the paths to Relation, which
consists of ongoing exchanges between various elements as well as
cultural *metissage*, and that "multilinguisme 'disperse' le texte écrit
dans une diversité concrète dont il faut dès maintenant explorer les
accès inconnus" ("plurilingualism 'diffuses' the written text in a
concrete diversity of which we must immediately explore the unknown
paths").[^4]

Therefore, in keeping with Glissant's conception of plurilingualism, the
*Library of Glissant Studies* strives to facilitate exchanges by
including multiple languages from numerous countries and to encourage
students, scholars, and readers to explore "unknown paths" in Glissant's
literary production while developing an aesthetic and structure
reflecting his notions of Relation and "archipelic-thinking." In the
2005 essay *La Cohée du Lamentin*, Glissant distinguished the "pensée
continentale, qui dévoile en diasporas les splendeurs absolues de
l'Un\[, et la\] pensée archipélique, où se concentre l'infinie variation
de la Diversité" ("continental-thinking, which reveals in diasporas the
absolute splendors of the One\[, and the\] archipelic-thinking, where
the infinite variation of Diversity is concentrated").[^5] By placing
these two types of thinking in opposition, Glissant favors the diverse
multiplicity (archipelic-thinking) over the repetition of the same
(continental-thinking). By bringing together languages, materials, and
scholars from various disciplines and geographical areas, we designed
our project to be faithful to this emphasis on plurality and diversity.

Although Glissant was influenced by his Caribbean heritage, his thought
and writings are not anchored to one particular place but rather
illustrate a worldly and intercontinental way of thinking. He left his
native island of Martinique at the age of eighteen to study in Paris, he
lived in Louisiana and in New York City, and he traveled extensively to
several islands in the Caribbean and all over the world. In fact,
Glissant repeatedly rejects the notion of *identité-racine*
(rooted-identity) to favor an *identité-rhizome* (rhizomatic-identity),
which embraces a vision of the world that focuses on diversity and
plurality instead of unicity and purity. Thus the *Library of Glissant
Studies* was designed with an esthetics of the Whole-World in mind, and
chronology seemed to be a more essential element to emphasize than
geography because it gives a clearer picture of the evolution of
Glissant's key notions and of their reception at particular moments in
time. Therefore, the project will soon include an evolutive map that
showcases the dispersion of the author's ideas throughout time by
showing dots on a map that correspond to the number of works by and
about the author created in a particular year.

Glissant's role in redefining Caribbean studies and Atlantic studies and
their roles as models for global studies is central to many recent
studies, such as, for example, Kristin Van Haesendonck and Theo D'Haen's
2014 edited volume *Caribbeing: Comparing Caribbean Literatures and
Cultures* and John E. Drabinski and Marisa Parham's 2015 volume of
essays *Theorizing Glissant: Sites and Citations*. Therefore, this
project also responds to the growing interest surrounding Glissant's
literary production. For instance, according to the French database
*Fichier central des thèses*, the number of completed doctoral theses in
France mentioning Glissant's theories and works has increased from only
11 in 2009 to 25 in 2017. Similarly, ProQuest.com lists 681 theses
devoted to Glissant produced in North America from 2008 to 2017. It is
clear that Glissant's texts and notions are continuously and
increasingly being studied and debated. Another indicator of the growing
interest in Glissant studies is that these works are no longer relegated
to French and francophone literary studies and are now the subject of
study in other academic fields and disciplines (e.g., comparative
literature, postcolonial theory, cultural criticism, linguistics,
anthropology, philosophy, history, etc.), as demonstrated by Van
Haesendonck and D'Haen's and Drabinski and Parham's volumes mentioned
above.[^6]

As perspectives on Glissant's work evolve, it remains difficult to
access and stay current with the numerous publications, events, and
documents created around the globe. This is also true of Glissant's
original works, which are inaccessible to the majority of researchers
because many of his writings have never been republished since their
initial appearance in currently unavailable literary journals,
newspapers, and catalogues of art exhibits. It was essential to gather
these materials to make them available to research and to further our
understanding of Glissant's work. *LoGS* now offers unique documents,
such as poems published in the early 1950s, rare interviews published in
various newspapers, and exclusive pictures and manuscripts of the author
sent in by various contributors. Thanks to this collection, readers and
scholars are able to have a better understanding of the movement and
evolution of Glissant writing process. For the project's directors, the
accumulation of documents creates an *archéologie relationnelle*
(relational archaeology) of Glissant's writing.[^7]

In fact, it allows the user to compare various texts from the same time
period, which reveals the ways Glissant developed one theme throughout
various genres and from different perspectives. For example, during the
1970s Glissant focused his literary production on the creation of a
written language resulting from an assemblage of both French and Creole.
This theory appears in 1975 in three forms: a conference presentation at
the University of Milwaukee--Madison in April (later modified and
included in Glissant's 1981 essay *The Caribbean Discourse*), a radio
interview on 10 July, and a novel titled *Malemort*. Before the *Library
of Glissant Studies*, these documents were scattered across different
physical and digital archives. In addition, some of them, such as
Glissant's presentation, were entirely unknown to the general public and
a majority of scholars. This illustrates how our digital project very
concretely lends itself to the creation of a relational archaeology,
which places texts from different genres and time periods in relation.
As a result, the 1975 conference presentation can be used to clarify
sections of the *Caribbean Discourse* published in 1981, therefore
opening new textual interpretations and permitting a better
understanding of Glissant's texts and evolutions of thought.

In addition, the digital archives allow us to perceive a "technique de
l'entassement, de la reprise, de la répétition" ("technique of stacking,
reiteration, repetition"),[^8] which results in the formulation of new
research questions, including, Why did the author stop writing poetry
for nineteen years? How did a particular notion evolve between the first
draft of an article or conference talk and the final publication? It is
a significant advancement in the field of Glissant studies to be able to
"see" the *ressassement* at work by placing literary journals from the
1950s and essays from the late 1960s in conversation. *Ressassement*,
which means repetition with minor changes and is often symbolized by a
spiral, plays an integral role in Glissant's writing as he explained to
Alexandre Leupin in *Les entretiens de Baton Rouge*: "La répétition et
le ressassement m'aident ainsi à fouiller" ("Repetition and
*ressassement* help me to search").[^9] For instance, a poem included in
Glissant's 1969 essay *Poetic Intention* was actually published nine
years previously in *La Voix des Poètes*, a literary journal directed by
Simone Chevalier.[^10] Therefore, a digital bibliography allows us to
create a complete overview of Glissant's work, to formulate new
questions, and to examine new dimensions of the author's thought.

Another objective of the project was to solve the problems created when
scholars and students in the United States are unfamiliar with or do not
have access to the developments in Glissant studies in Japan and when
scholars in France are not aware of the works being produced in Canada,
and so on. Although platforms such as JSTOR, WorldCat, Project MUSE,
Érudit, and EBSCOHost make it possible to access some of these critical
and literary productions, they are incomplete and often limited to
particular languages or geographical regions. They also do not offer the
interactive features necessary to allow Glissant scholars to collaborate
with one another. By gathering all of Glissant's criticism in one place,
it is possible to see which issues have been discussed at length, such
as the notion of Relation, creolization, and *antillanité*, and which
ones require further study. For example, the journal *Acoma* created by
Glissant and divided into five issues has been analyzed only in pieces
in two scholarly articles.[^11] In keeping the bibliography current, we
hope to see new topics of research emerge in the future and to encourage
Glissantian criticism not to repeat itself by keeping people apprised of
what types of work are being produced, and to keep the field of Glissant
studies lively and innovative.

From a practical standpoint, the *Library of Glissant Studies* consists
of an interface organized into two primary bibliographic categories:
texts and works written by Édouard Glissant and texts and works written
about Édouard Glissant. The items in these sections are organized in
chronological order to emphasize how particular essays and novels were
shaped by previous publications in literary journals and prefaces and
also to easily compare the author's work, its reception, and its
criticisms. In addition, each user will be able to search by language,
year, type of document, or keyword, and each of these subcategories
includes the language and country of publication. In the near future,
when looking for a specific topic, researchers will be able to discover
additional materials through network visualization. Under each of the
categories, bibliographical references will be indicated using the
eighth edition of the *Modern Language Association Handbook* and
accompanied by a PDF document or digital scan of materials in the public
domain or by a link to the text in question if it is still under
copyright (via Cairn, JSTOR, or other reference sites). The website also
has a section in which users can submit documents to be considered for
the project's platform. All the submitted documents are reviewed by our
executive board to ensure the accuracy and authenticity of the
information before posting them on our website.

One of the most common challenges faced in academic endeavors is finding
monetary support, and, because of a lack of funding, *LoGS* relies on a
free web platform and the voluntary work of dozens of dedicated
individuals. During the first year of the project, Raphaël Lauro, who
had archived Glissant's manuscripts for the National Library of France,
and Jeanne Jégousso, who recovered and archived documentation for the
Center for French and Francophone Studies at Louisiana State University,
worked together with the support of Édouard Glissant's widow, Sylvie
Glissant, to archive the author's lesser-known works. During this
period, Lauro and Jégousso indexed most of the scholarly work produced
in France and in the United States, designed and built the website, and
contacted established researchers and graduate students to create a
network of Glissant scholars. This interdisciplinary team of students,
scholars, and independent researchers is responsible for fostering
greater accessibility to past and present work and to creating a
discussion with a wide and diverse audience.

Today, *LoGS* is structured around seven research and editorial groups,
divided into geographical areas and led by one or several scholars. Each
group is in charge of relaying the new publications, events, archives,
and other type of materials to the project's e-mail address
(glissantstudies\[at\]gmail.com). The information is then processed and
added to the website. Each team leader has involved his or her
institution to support the project and to contribute to the efforts of
securing grants. The teams are located in Japan (Takayuki Nakamura,
Waseda University), France (Sylvie Glissant and Loïc Céry, Institut du
Tout-monde), Québec (Raphaël Lauro, Université de Montréal), the United
States (Jeanne Jégousso, Hollins University, and Charly Verstraet, Emory
University), Martinique (Axel Arthéron and Dominique Aurélia, Université
des Antilles), Cuba (Camila Valdés, Casa de las Americas), and Italy
(Elena Pessini, University of Parma).

In addition to the editorial board, the *Library of Glissant Studies*
relies on the involvement of an advisory board and a team of
contributors. The advisory board consists of renowned scholars in the
field of Glissant studies, and their endorsement is a testament to the
rigor of the project. The contributors are students, scholars, and
critical thinkers who have sent at least five new references to the
project. Their efforts are recognized by adding their picture and
biography to our website. This is to say that the *Library of Glissant
Studies* is first and foremost a collective project, where people share
their references, meet one another during colloquia focusing on
Glissant's work, and engage with each other on our social media
platforms. Over the past few months, our team has provided documentation
and support to curators for exhibits in Paris and Miami, created
awareness of upcoming publications and translations (e.g., an upcoming
Japanese version of the *Caribbean Discourse*, the first Spanish
translation of Glissant's essay *The Philosophy of Relation*, and an
updated English translation of Glissant's poems), and provided
pedagogical support and materials to help professors find the ideal
documents for their students.

During this process, we had to think about how to build a digital
bibliography and how to examine our digital practices in order to create
and design a unique tool that is faithful not only to Glissant's work
and philosophy but also to our wish to further research and
collaboration while being as inclusive as possible. The *Library of
Glissant Studies* was created to facilitate "la consultation des sources
sans véritablement se prononcer, en apparence, sur les méthodes
d'analyse qui doivent être employees" ("the consultation of sources
without determining the methods of analysis that must be used"), to
quote Pierre Mounier in his 2018 essay *Les humanités numériques: Une
histoire critique*.[^12] Following this principle, the *Library of
Glissant Studies* was designed as a collection without any
interpretation to guide or influence the user, thereby leaving the
interpretation and analysis of the documents and archives to the users.

Concerning the project's sustainability, in the future we plan to
consolidate our digital platform by gaining more team members and
universities and by adding a digital initiatives and metadata librarian
to our team. This will ensure that the project is built to last, thus
preserving all the materials and exclusive documents we are currently
providing to the public. We have also recently undergone the process of
copyrighting exclusive documents (inscribed books, archives,
personalized poems written by Glissant, etc.) and watermarking photos in
order to convince people to securely share their personal archives. This
also serves to remind users of the source of the material and to pay
tribute to contributors who took the time to send their personal
documents to our team.

{% include image.html
  img="issue04/odell-jegousso/LibraryofGlissantStudies_Image1.png"
  title="Works by Édouard Glissant: Inscribed Books"
  caption="Figure 1. Screen shot of inscribed books received between
June and October 2019."
  url="https://www.glissantstudies.com/inscribed-books.html" %}

Since doing so, we have seen an increase in the number of contributions
and hope to continue to see these numbers rise. We are currently working
to create individual archival funds, which will collect in one place the
documents related to Glissant that belong to a single individual. This
new initiative has been successful and has encouraged several scholars
and several of Glissant's former colleagues to share their materials
with the project.

{% include image.html
  img="issue04/odell-jegousso/LibraryofGlissantStudies_Image2.png"
  title="Works by Édouard Glissant: Manuscripts"
  caption="Figure 2. Screen shot of manuscripts generously shared by
Alexandre Leupin."
  url="https://www.glissantstudies.com/manuscripts.html" %}

The *Library of Glissant Studies* has received an increasing amount of
support over the past few months. It has been added to the *Caribbean
Literary Heritage* digital collection, it has been included in several
university libraries in Florida and Louisiana, and numerous newspaper
articles about the project have been published in France, Japan, and the
United States. However, there are still several ongoing challenges that
we strive to address. For example, our team has thus far not been
successful in accessing data in Eastern Europe, Eastern Asia, or several
African countries, so we are working to establish and develop new
partnerships with individuals in these localities in order to index more
materials, which would make these works of literary criticism available
to a greater number of users. We also hope that by presenting the
project in as many forums as possible we will be able to receive more
feedback to improve our search options, further develop our interface,
and add forums for people to ask questions, exchanges ideas, and discuss
pedagogical strategies.

---

[^1]: Édouard Glissant, discussion with Raphaël Lauro, December 2010, Paris. Unless otherwise noted, all translations are ours.

[^2]: See the *Library of Glissant Studies*, <https://www.glissantstudies.com>.

[^3]: Édouard Glissant, *La Cohée du Lamentin* (Paris: Gallimard, 2005), 137.

[^4]: Édouard Glissant, *Le discours antillais* (Paris: Gallimard, 1997), 616.

[^5]: Glissant, *La Cohée du Lamentin*, 231.

[^6]: Kristin Van Haesendonck and Theo D'Haen, *Caribbeing: Comparing Caribbean Literatures and Cultures* (Amsterdam: Rodopi, 2014); and John E. Drabinski and Marisa Parham, *Theorizing Glissant: Sites and Citations* (London: Rowman and Littlefield, 2015). Other examples include Celia Britton, *Édouard Glissant and Postcolonial Theory: Strategies of Language and Resistance* (Charlottesville: University Press of Virginia, 1999); Christina Kullberg, "Crossroads Poetics: Glissant and Ethnography," *Callaloo* 36, no. 4 (2013): 968--82; Alexandre Leupin, *Édouard Glissant, philosophe: Héraclite et Hegel dans le Tout-monde* (Paris: Hermann, 2016); and Michael Wiedorn, *Think like an Archipelago: Paradox in the Work of Édouard Glissant* (New York: State University of New York Press, 2018).

[^7]: This notion and its consequences were presented in a symposium at the University of Cambridge. See Raphaël Lauro, "Édouard Glissant, archiviste de lui-même: L'exemple du *Discours antillais*" (paper presented at Édouard Glissant: Le cri et la parole, Cambridge, June 2019).

[^8]: Ibid.

[^9]: Alexandre Leupin, *Les entretiens de Baton Rouge* (Paris: Gallimard, 2008), 58.

[^10]: Édouard Glissant, *L'intention poétique* (Paris: Gallimard, 1997), 26.

[^11]: See *Acoma: Revue de littérature, de sciences humaines et politiques trimestrielle, 1--5, 1971--1973* (Perpignan: Presses Universitaires de Perpignan, 2005).

[^12]: Pierre Mounier, *Les humanités numériques: Une histoire critique* (Paris: Éditions de la Maison des sciences de l'homme, 2018), 48.
