---
layout: project
section: projects
title: 
  "long": "*archipelagos* Presents *Carisealand: Sustainable Caribbean Futures*"
  "short": "Carisealand"
doi: ""
author: 
- name: Schuyler Esprit
  shortname: Esprit
  bio: >
    Schuyler Esprit is a scholar of Caribbean literary and cultural studies and digital humanities. Her current research explores the intersections of environmental humanities, futurism, and radical Caribbean literary and political discourse. She is the founding director of the Create Caribbean Research Institute, the first digital humanities center in the Caribbean, based in Dominica. She is currently a program officer at the University of the West Indies, Open Campus.
date: February, 2020
issue: 4
order: 10
image: images/issue04/carisealand.png
thumb: images/issue04/carisealand-thumb.png
link: "https://ecda.northeastern.edu/"
---

The *Carisealand* (Caribbean Sea and Land) digital research project,
launched in 2015 by scholar, teacher, and activist Schuyler K Esprit,
provides an interactive framework within which to imagine a more
sustainable way of life for Caribbean people, both in the present day
and in the future. The project aims to create awareness around the
impact of climate change in the Caribbean region; to initiate and
sustain collaborations with scholars and artists in an effort to find
solutions to social injustices resulting from climate change activity;
and to present models for alternate Caribbean futures. The project is
interdisciplinary; it is undergirded by thoughtful humanistic
considerations of and scientific, anthropological, and sociological
inquiries into the ways and extent to which the diverse linguistic,
ethnic, social, and other spaces of the Caribbean endure the "natural"
effects of empire. Through sustained engagement with an ever-widening
community of regional cultural and political actors, *Carisealand*
offers a platform on which to showcase visions of survival through the
perils of a changing natural environment, including recent massive
hurricanes.

## *archipelagos* review

*Carisealand* is an ambitious exploration of an alternative,
collective response to climate change. Set against the backdrop of the
Caribbean's increasing geographic and sociopolitical vulnerability, the
work presented in this project is both timely and urgent. However, there
is evidence that the project is still in its very early stages of
conceptual, methodological, and material design; as a result, there are
a number of areas that can be addressed.

While the authors want to engage with the issue of climate change as it
affects the Caribbean region, at this point, the majority of the project
focuses primarily on Dominica (with the exception of the Map artifact).
While this initial focus is not problematic, the focus should be
explained. Additionally, how the authors anticipate and plan for the
systematic coverage of the wider Eastern Caribbean region is not
entirely clear. While the key questions of the project (on the home
page) indicate a specific focus on the Eastern Caribbean (EC), this
focus isn't clearly articulated in the project description.
Additionally, resources from other islands not traditionally identified
as part of the EC---for example, Guyana and Trinidad and
Tobago---are showcased. If the project seeks to focus on the EC, are
there a peculiar set of vulnerabilities that make this part of the
region a necessary focus for the authors? Aside from these general
concerns, I recommend that the authors consider the following revisions.

### ## Contribution

The target audience should be made clearer in the project overview on
the home page. For example, who do the authors expect to come to this
platform and why? What type of engagement do they expect and solicit
from this audience? Answers to these questions must not only be made
explicit in some written description but also should be made implicit in
the design (site nomenclature, for example) of the platform as well.

Perhaps my biggest concern at this stage involves the methodological
rigor of the project. For example, how are projects chosen? What is the
rationale for choosing the nine project topics (e.g., agriculture,
water, and food security)? How do these topics explicitly connect to the
overarching concern of climate change and to the other project topics
listed? What theories inform these decisions and artifacts? Which
Caribbean theorists are being invited into conversation through this
project? What projects currently exist that do this work? What is the
unique contribution that this digital project makes in this space? Aside
from the insightful list of questions provided with each of the
subtopics, the authors should consider adding a reading list that
engages with the topics' issues (I am thinking, for example, of work by
Tanya Chung Tiam Fook and Christopher Corbin).[^f1]

### Credit

While work on certain artifacts indicate authorship, often one must view
the artifact (e.g., video) to access this information. The project needs
to develop some style guide for acknowledging and referencing sources
for the artifacts. Bios of contributors would be useful and would
provide a welcomed transparency to the project.

### Design

Subsection project pages need some written overview. The questions that
currently appear, while useful, do not provide the reader with an
orientation to the content; for example, the Map initially provides a
description of the resources on environmental conservation and
sustainability in Dominica. However, it is not obvious until the user
begins scrolling that resources on other islands are also described.
Therefore, some overview to the Map feature needs to be provided. What
can the reader do here? How is this information relevant to the
project's overarching purpose?

Because the project is still in its early stage of development,
accessibility should be addressed now. For example, are there plans to
provide transcripts of and closed captioning for audio/video recordings?
Minimally, ALT tags (alternative text) must be included for all images.

The usability of the site needs to be addressed, particularly concerning
navigation, to ensure that the user knows where they are in the site's
architecture and how to move around the site. For example, when a link
takes the reader off the site to an external source, this should be
indicated. Additionally, on some pages, when the user is in the lower
levels of the site, it is not always clear how to return to the home
page (see Map content, for example). Additionally, I encourage a
rethinking of the information architecture/nomenclature of the site's
menu, since some labels (The Lab, Network, for example) are not
intuitive.

If the authors have not already discussed this, there should be some
user guidelines/agreement for this work. How is the project engaging
with the issue of intellectual property? How do the authors want
artifacts cited? What can be downloaded? How is fair use defined?
Finally, about the authors should consider audience's citation needs and
ensure that all information is available for complete citations (e.g.,
dates of page updates, authors' names, proper titles of articles and
pages, etc.).

### Preservation

I am uncertain if preservation of the site's content has been addressed.
Practically, how will existing content be maintained, archived, or
updated? Is there consideration of a mark-up language to support the
reconstitution of content? Is Wordpress as a content management system a
feasible long-term option for the administration of the project's needs?

## Response from the Lead of *Carisealand*

In 2015, Caribbean writer and environmental activist Oonya Kempadoo
approached the [Create Caribbean Research
Institute](http://createcaribbean.org/create/) collective with a number
of ideas about how to collaborate in generating more conversation around
environmentalism and how the arts and humanities might influence the
visibility and change required in a Caribbean space faced with the
realities of a vulnerable planet.[^f2] A few weeks after this initial
conversation, Tropical Storm Erika hit Dominica, bringing more than
twenty inches of rain in fewer than twelve hours, causing island-wide
flooding and leading to the deaths of more than thirty people. The
urgency was clear. Our conversations about the lack of a cohesive
regional message on environmental activism informed the digital research
project Kempadoo named Carisealand. Emphasizing the Caribbean
archipelago's geographical, cultural, and linguistic connections through
land and sea, the original goal of the project was to create a shared
resource for Caribbean scholars and activists concerned about
environmental sustainability.

*Carisealand* began with one question: What can we do to compile and
organize as many resources as possible on environmentalist action and
climate activism in the Caribbean region? We imagined a database that
would reach from Florida in the north to Venezuela in the south,
inclusive of Central American territories. This geographical
expansiveness was designed to place climate-change workers across the
region in conversation with one another---a starting point for
collaboration and dialogue. Over time, the project expanded to include
both intellectual inquiry and narrative representation of the histories
and possibilities of the Caribbean's struggle with modernity through the
discourses of nature and environment.

At its core, the *Carisealand* project has sought to bring together
scholars, artists, and activists to think through a number of
challenging questions. *Carisealand* is, above all, a pedagogical
space within which undergraduate students in both digital humanities and
Caribbean studies might explore issues at the intersection of research,
technology, and civic engagement, as outlined in [the mission of Create
Caribbean](http://createcaribbean.org/create/the-create-mission/).
Students working on *Carisealand* are interns in the [Research and
Service Learning Internship Program of Create
Caribbean](http://createcaribbean.org/create/internship/), and they are
required to take courses in [digital humanities
research](http://createcaribbean.org/his115/) during their first
semester in the program and to enroll in a one-credit-per-semester
Research Colloquium during their tenure at Dominica State College.
Students from the past three cohorts (2016 through 2018) have
collaborated on *Carisealand* as their graded course requirement.
Content under [ACF Series](http://carisealand.org/acf-docuseries/),
[Class Projects](http://carisealand.org/class-projects/),
[Blog](http://createcaribbean.org/create/carisealand/), and Map all
reflects work produced for students' digital humanities research course,
continued during internship hours, and supervised under their research
colloquium enrollment.[^f3]

Like every other digital humanities project supported by Create
Caribbean, the target audience for *Carisealand* is primarily high
school and college students but extends to the wider public; it is not
necessarily centered on academic spaces. For example, the projects
published by Create Caribbean are frequently used as teaching aids in
classrooms in Dominica and used as research resources for patrons in the
national public library service. As such, the content on the site avoids
academic jargon, heavy theoretical explication, or deep engagement with
theory in the public interface. That being said, students of Create
Caribbean engage in critical readings of Sylvia Wynter, Kamau
Brathwaite, Emily Raboteau, Elizabeth DeLoughrey, and Elizabeth
Thomas-Hope, among others, as they create their projects. Additionally,
their course calls on literary influences such as Wilson Harris, Derek
Walcott, Octavia Butler, and Nalo Hopkinson---creative writers who
imagine alternative futures for black people amid environmental strife
and injustice. The content produced and published on the site thus far
reflects students' interpretations and responses to their course
readings.

Expansion of the project goals, in particular the decision to focus more
deliberately on Eastern Caribbean concerns, came in the aftermath of
Hurricanes Irma and María, which decimated a number of smaller nations
in September 2017. The trauma and uncertainty of surviving a category-5
hurricane resulted in a sense of responsibility to move the
conversations and actions forward to document the humanistic questions
and answers that emerge from climate disaster. At that time, the project
authors worked with students of Create Caribbean to reflect on the broad
areas they viewed as most relevant to the conversation about how climate
activity affected their day-to-day lives. The project topics presented
on the site were proposed by students in the 2017 cohort as the most
impactful areas of public discourse following that year's hurricane
season.

In support of the intention to direct content to students, the authors
plan to include one of the theoretical exercises of the digital
humanities research course in the final layout of the site---the
Carisealand Syllabus, which includes a bibliography of all the work
informing the project design and the resources cited within projects and
used in the classroom, as well as resources curated by students during
their individual research exercises.

Navigation has been the greatest challenge to the public-facing platform
of *Carisealand*. With so much content that is so extensive across
Caribbean and climate studies, the project architects have struggled
with refining the Home page to reflect the full depth and breadth of the
project. To respond to some of these concerns, we will redesign the
interface in three main categories: [the
Map](http://carisealand.org/mapping/neatline/fullscreen/carismapping),
the Carisealand Syllabus, and [the
Lab](http://carisealand.org/the-lab/). The Map will feature a completed
visualization of the original database. We intend to migrate the map
feature to ArcGIS instead of Omeka to accommodate some logistic and
design features that would be difficult in its current format. The
Carisleand Syllabus space will capture most of the primary and secondary
content featured on the site---class projects, a formal bibliography,
project topic content, and the Alternative Caribbean Futures Video
Series. The Lab, which is the most incomplete part of the site to date,
is a digital humanities experimental space where students will present
their finished 3-D modeling project of a redesigned sustainable
Caribbean community, representing in the first instance the village of
Mahaut, Dominica. What currently appears on the page labeled "The Lab"
is a visualization of the historical context of the community, organized
according to the students' selected project topics.

The intellectual and pedagogical approach to this project and all others
at Create Caribbean is an exercise in narrative. Storytelling, which
includes listening to our elders and ancestors in the ananse tradition
of "krik! krak!" call-and-response, is our humanities praxis. Listening
to and recounting the stories of others, and then telling our own
stories, shifts the paradigm from defeated victims of natural and
manmade disasters to defenders of our right to exist no matter how small
or how far away.

In our previous digital research projects, primarily focused on
documenting Dominican and Caribbean history and literature, the
intellectual and personal motive has been to resist and reject the way
the physical space of Dominica and the Caribbean have been defined as
too small, too poor, or too underdeveloped for intellectual and economic
progress. In this case, with *Carisealand*, and with the Lab more
particularly, much more is at stake: survival and viability. This is a
call to resist the concept of resilience, of acceptance and response to
defeat, a call to instead choose to fight with everything we have in the
here and now to save our homes, our friends, our own lives.

The vision for *Carisealand* has transformed and expanded since its
launch in 2015. Through the three pillars of the project---the
resource map, the Carisealand Syllabus, and the Lab---*Carisealand*
aims to reflect constantly on one idea: What does it mean to be a
courageous Caribbean citizen in the age of climate change? Part of that
courage requires telling and retelling stories of the history and future
of the Caribbean as we see it, despite the inevitability of
environmental and sociopolitical upheaval.

A significant challenge for the site has been to engage the scholars
working on the project in guiding first- and second-year undergraduate
students toward the critical thinking-through of some of the more
complex theoretical questions and methodologies required for rigorous
inquiry and digital humanities project design. Through various
collaborations, the authors have identified faculty and graduate student
mentors in the Caribbean and North America to work with students on the
development of their individual contributions to the site. The project
has since received some of this support through a collaboration with
Duke University's [Forum for Scholars and
Publics](https://fsp.trinity.duke.edu/about-forum-scholars-and-publics),
and the authors now estimate a publication date of June 2020 for a
revised *Carisealand*.[^f4] Some of the more obvious issues with a
credits page, streamlined navigation, and a site map are underway for a
formal relaunch of the completed version; the final version of the Lab
will also be launched on a linked platform.

---

[^f1]: Tanya Chung Tiam Fook, "A 'Win-Win' Strategy for All? Guyana's Climate Change Strategies and Implications for Indigenous Communities,"*Caribbean Journal of International Relations and Diplomacy* 1, no. 1 (2013): 3--38; Christopher Corbin, "'There Is No Green without Blue': An Analysis of the Importance of Coastal and Marine Resources to the Development of Green Economies by Caribbean SIDS," *Caribbean Journal of International Relations and Diplomacy* 1, no. 3 (2013): 47--59.

[^f2]: The Create Caribbean Research Institute, located at Dominica State College, is the first digital humanities center in the Caribbean. Its goal is to bridge research, technology, and community outreach with digital scholarship as a way to help students imagine and build a better Caribbean. Create Caribbean's mission is to use digital humanities for investigating and sharing stories about Caribbean culture, to bridge the digital divide in the region through technology education programs, and to use its digital resources to support community efforts, particularly through environmental activism and literacy advocacy. See [http://createcaribbean.org/create/](http://createcaribbean.org/create/).

[^f3]: For Create Caribbean's mission, see "The Create Mission,"[http://createcaribbean.org/create/the-create-mission/](http://createcaribbean.org/create/the-create-mission/), and on the Research and Service Learning Internship Program of Create Caribbean, see "Internship,"[http://createcaribbean.org/create/internship/](http://createcaribbean.org/create/internship/). For information on the required research course, see "Digital Humanities Research (HIS 115); Dominica State College---Instructor, Schuyler K Esprit, PhD,"[http://createcaribbean.org/his115/](http://createcaribbean.org/his115/).

[^f4]: On Duke University's forum, see "About Forum for Scholars and Publics,"[https://fsp.trinity.duke.edu/about-forum-scholars-and-publics](https://fsp.trinity.duke.edu/about-forum-scholars-and-publics).

