---
layout: page
section: introduction
issue: 4
order: 1
date: February 2020
title: "A Momentous Transition"
doi: "https://doi.org/10.7916/archipelagos-39cd-mn05"
author: 
- name: Kaiama L. Glover
  shortname: Glover
  bio: >
    [Kaiama L. Glover](https://barnard.edu/profiles/kaiama-l-glover) is Associate Professor of French and Africana Studies at Barnard College, Columbia University. She is the author of [Haiti Unbound: A Spiralist Challenge to the Postcolonial Canon](http://liverpooluniversitypress.co.uk/products/61903) (Liverpool UP 2010), first editor of [Marie Vieux Chauvet: Paradoxes of the Postcolonial Feminine](http://yalebooks.com/book/9780300214192/yale-french-studies-number-128) (Yale French Studies 2016), and translator of Frankétienne's Ready to Burst (Archipelago Books 2014). She has received awards and fellowships from the National Endowment for the Humanities, the Mellon Foundation, and the Fulbright Foundation. Current projects include forthcoming translations of Marie Vieux Chauvet's *Dance on the Volcano* (Archipelago Books) and René Depestre's *Hadriana in All My Dreams* (Akashic Books), and the multimedia platform *In the Same Boats: Toward an Afro-Atlantic Visual Cartography*.
- name: Alex Gil
  shortname: Gil
  bio: >
    [Alex Gil](http://www.elotroalex.com/) is the Digital Scholarship Librarian at Columbia University Libraries. His research and practice focuses on digital humanities, epistemic design, minimal computing, and Caribbean literature. He is co-founder and moderator of [Columbia's Group for Experimental Methods in Humanistic Research](http://xpmethod.plaintext.in/), and the Studio@Butler at Columbia University Libraries.
language: en
---

It has been something of a particular challenge to reach the finish line
with this fourth issue of our journal, and this for two reasons---both
of them, in the end, exhilarating. First, there is what feels like a
momentous transition: hatched four years ago and graciously incubated in
the luxurious intellectual nest that is the Small Axe Project, we now
set off on our very first solo flight. From *sx archipelagos* we have
evolved into the newly-named *archipelagos journal*---a critical space
that is at once very much of its origins and original unto itself, both
devoted to SXP's foundational critical intentions and committed to forms
of experimentation and networks of expansion that are unique to our
digital Caribbean context. Second, we are making a joyful and ambitious
move toward plurilingual representation. Our Caribbean speaks in many
tongues, and honoring that reality through translation is our urgent
priority. We are thrilled to launch this issue with its trilingual
back-end and opening to the possibility of publication here in Spanish
and French as well as English---an initial, modest effort toward
building a more inclusive and relational intellectual space. There is
more to do, we know, and we aim to do it in time, with the help of and
in service to the very community that sustains us.

Questions of community, relation, and service run through every one of
the contributions to this issue. In our first section, Elena Machado
calls on us to think carefully about the ethics of mobilizing community
via the fraught context of social media. She looks closely at Lin-Manuel
Miranda's crafty stagings of intimacy and "emotional debt" with his
Twitter followers, comparing his use of the platform to that of Latinx
creative actors who operate in a decidedly "more minor key." Machado's
essay also reflects on and models, with bold transparency, an ethical
practice of scholarly engagement with social media authors. Detailing
the successes and failures of the methodology she deployed to constitute
the archive powering her research, Machado both shows and tells her
hard-won best archival practices. 

Kimberly Takahata, Jeanne Jegousso and Emily O'Dell, and Chelsea Stieber
similarly offer thoughtful reflections on Caribbean archives, and do so
from a variety of perspectives---all of which involve questions of
collaboration, translation, accessibility, and experimentation. In an
essay that is in fruitful dialogue with much of the work we have
published in earlier issues of *archipelagos*, Takahata outlines the
counter-plantational digital praxis that undergirds the deeply
collaborative "Digital Grainger" project. Takahata lays out the
strategies and queries that determined the project's purposeful
re-presentation of a colonial text. Her essay highlights the exemplary
digital design practices that can allow contestatory readings of white
supremacist narratives. In their essay devoted to the *Library of
Glissant Studies* site, Jeanne Jegousso and Emily O'Dell make a case for
the unique affordances of the digital in building scholarly community
across the borders of nation and language that are the legacies of
empire in our academic lives. 

The section's final two essays evoke the particular "care and
maintenance work" required to embark on digitization projects for
Caribbean-sited archives. Chelsea Stieber, Watson Denis, and Laura
Wrubel relate the theoretical and practical dimensions of a partnership
between a longstanding but under-resourced Haitian intellectual
institution and a network of scholars and institutions in the United
States. Their essay generously reveals the technical and interpersonal
dynamic behind the open-access, multilingual platform they've developed
as a US-Haitian team. Amalia Levi and Tara Inniss are equally thorough
in their account of the specific processes involved in the twinned
practices of digitization and preservation behind their decolonizing
engagement with a particular Bajan periodical. Their essay beautifully
lays out the political and intellectual stakes of intervening in an
economically imperiled and environmentally vulnerable Caribbean archive.

Our project peer review section features the first stage in an ongoing
exchange between our blind reviewers and Schuyler Esprit, motive force
behind the digital environmentalist platform Carisealand. Esprit's
project recognizes the multi-vectored man-and-nature-made perils facing
the Americas, and so proposes a multi-vectored approach to confronting
them: practices of pedagogy, archiving, and storytelling are but a few
of the registers of her project. In this exchange, Esprit responds to
our review by laying out the challenges presented by the unique
circumstances of the project's creation and outlines future plans for
its development.

Bringing us full circle to a final engagement with social media and
*Latinidad*, we wrap up this issue with Élika Ortega's public review of
@protestitas and @TinyProtests. Ortega looks at this pair of bots of
conviction---one in Spanish, the other in English---created by Puerto
Rican scholar of e-poetry Leonardo Flores, and asks to what extent
transnational solidarity can be facilitated by the parallel mobilization
of linguo-cultural contexts that both speak to and diverge from one
another.

*Et voilà*. Welcome to the fledgling issue of *archipelagos | a journal
of Caribbean digital praxis*. We embark on this next phase of the
adventure humbly, and with gratitude to David Scott and the whole of the
Small Axe Project team for so well preparing us to soar.

Onward,

Kaiama & Alex

Editors
