---
layout: article
section: articles
title: 
  "long": "Cross-Boundary Digital Collaboration as Scholarly and Institutional Experimentation: Amplifying the Impact of Caribbean Periodicals"
  "short": "Cross-Boundary Digital Collaboration"
doi: "https://doi.org/10.7916/archipelagos-vdts-xg77"
author: 
- name: Chelsea Stieber
  shortname: Stieber
  bio: >
    Chelsea Stieber is an assistant professor of French and francophone studies at the Catholic University of America. She is the author of *Haiti's Paper War: Post-independence Writing, Civil War, and the Making of the Republic, 1804--1954* (New York University Press, forthcoming). She is also a coeditor of the critical translation *Haiti for the Haitians* (Liverpool University Press, forthcoming).
- name: Laura Wrubel
  shortname: Wrubel
  bio: >
    Laura Wrubel is a software development librarian at the George Washington University. She supports digital scholarship at the Libraries and Academic Innovation, including applications such as the open-source software [Social Feed Manager](https://go.gwu.edu/sfm) for building social media datasets. She is a [Carpentries](https://carpentries.org/) instructor and teaches workshops on Python, Git, and other computational topics for students, faculty, and library staff.
- name: Watson Denis
  shortname: Denis
  bio: >
    Watson Denis is a professor of history, international relations, and Haitian social thought at the State University of Haiti and the general secretary of the Société haïtienne d'histoire, de géographie et de géologie. He is the author of *Haïti au-delà du 12 janvier 2015: Droit, constitution et politique* (C3 Éditions, 2015), *Haïti: Changer le cours de l'histoire* (C3 Éditions, 2016), and *Haïti, la CARICOM et la Caraïbe: Questions d'économie politique, d'intégration économique et de relations internationales* (C3 Éditions, 2018). His latest book, *La négation du droit à la nationalité: La situation d'apatridie des Dominicains et Dominicaines d'ascendance haïtienne en République dominicaine* is forthcoming in 2020.
date: January, 2020
issue: 4
order: 6
abstract: >
  This essay analyzes the role that experimental work played in the multi-institutional, cross-boundary collaborative construction of the RSHHGG Lab, an interactive online index of Haiti's preeminent social science journal, the *Revue de la Société haïtienne d'histoire, de géographie et de géologie*. Here, the authors understand experimentation to be a mindset, an attitude of "try it and see what happens" through iterative small risks and an openness to involving others and changing direction. This approach draws on the spirit of collaboration, experimentation, and sharing that informs the LC Labs initiative at the Library of Congress, and the *revue* (magazine-journal) as a print space of exchange, confrontation, and collective creation. Following recent reflections on information maintenance and care ethics, the authors agree that infrastructures of information maintenance are often invisible and institutionally siloed and tend to reproduce structures of oppression and silencing. They aim here to highlight the institutional and infrastructural experimentation and labor necessary to create what is, essentially, a project of information management: making a key repository of knowledge usable, discoverable and accessible. The authors contend that experimental work was central to successfully working within---and also challenging---extant infrastructures of information maintenance in order to achieve an independent, sustainable project with room to grow and transform. In attending to the various processes of experimentation that underwrote the RSHHGG Lab, the authors hope to demonstrate the fruitfulness of cross-boundary collaborative projects and, ultimately, to advocate for more infrastructures of experimentation in many forms: research leave, labs, residencies, and further creative approaches to blurring the boundaries of labor.
abstract_fr: >
  Le RSHHGG Lab, un index intéractif en ligne qui répertorie plus de 90 ans de la plus ancienne revue de sciences sociales en Haiti (*La Revue de la Société Haïtienne d'Histoire, de Géographie et de Géologie*), a été élaboré de manière collaborative et à l'intersection de plusieurs disciplines et institutions. Cet article analyse le rôle joué spécifiquement par la traduction dans la construction collaborative de ce projet en humanités numériques. Ici, nous entendons « traduction » dans son sens le plus large. Nous considérons la traduction des sources matérielles originales en forme de base de données, ainsi que la traduction à l'œuvre dans la création de meta-données, et enfin la traduction d'idées en produits digitaux qui peuvent être travaillés et incluent des scripts et du code court. Nous considérons également le rôle de la traduction au sein des partenariats collaboratifs : la traduction opérée entre les humanités et les disciplines de bibliothéconomie, les traductions entre les attentes et la réalité, ainsi que la traduction entre plusieurs langues et registres : le créole, le français et l'anglais. Enfin, nous considérons la manière dont le projet traduit le travail en valeur pour les différents intervenants du projet---non seulement pour les contributeurs principaux au projet (la Société, l'humaniste, et le bibliothécaire)---mais pour les différentes institutions et les contributeurs individuels impliqués. En examinant les différents processus de traduction à l'œuvre dans le RSHHGG Lab, les auteures espèrent démontrer la fertilité des projects collaboratifs trans-frontaliers et contribuer plus largement aux projets en humanités numériques.
abstract_es: >
  Este ensayo analiza el papel que desempeñó el trabajo experimental en la construcción colaborativa multi-institucional y trans-fronteriza del Laboratorio RSHHGG, un índice interactivo en línea de la revista de ciencias sociales preeminente de Haití, *Revue de la Société haïtienne d'histoire, de géographie et de géologie*. Aquí, los autores entienden que la experimentación es una manera de pensar, una actitud de "probar y ver qué sucede" a través de pequeños riesgos iterativos y una apertura a involucrar a otros y cambiar de dirección cuando es necesario. Este enfoque se basa en el espíritu de colaboración, experimentación e intercambio que informa la iniciativa LC Labs en la Biblioteca del Congreso, y la *revue* (revista) como un espacio impreso de intercambio, confrontación y creación colectiva. Tras las recientes reflexiones sobre el mantenimiento de la información y la ética del cuidado, los autores coinciden en que las infraestructuras de mantenimiento de la información a menudo son invisibles e institucionalmente aisladas y, a menudo, reproducen estructuras de opresión y silenciamiento. Su objetivo aquí es resaltar la experimentación institucional y de infraestructura y el trabajo necesarios para crear lo que es, esencialmente, un proyecto de gestión de la información: hacer que un depósito clave de conocimiento sea utilizable, reconocible y accesible. Los autores sostienen que el trabajo experimental fue fundamental para trabajar con éxito dentro de las infraestructuras existentes y también desafiantes para el mantenimiento de la información a fin de lograr un proyecto independiente y sostenible con espacio para crecer y transformarse. Al atender los diversos procesos de experimentación que respaldaron el Laboratorio RSHHGG, los autores esperan demostrar la fecundidad de los proyectos de colaboración transfronterizos y, en última instancia, abogar por más infraestructuras de experimentación en muchas formas: licencia de investigación, laboratorios, residencias y enfoques creativos adicionales para difuminar los límites del trabajo.
language: en
---

{% include epigraph.html
    quote = "The fact that outsiders were not interested in what was happening in Haiti does not permit us to conclude that nothing had happened there."
    citation = "Michel-Philippe Lerebours, *Haïti et ses peintres*"
%}

Over the last ninety years, Haitian scholars and intellectuals have
published more than 260 issues and more than 1,300 articles in the pages
of the *Revue de la Société haïtienne d'histoire, de géographie et de
géologie* (*RSHHGG*). The publication is the greatest repository of
historical research produced on Haiti, from Haiti. We contend that
Haitian scholarly periodicals, and Caribbean periodicals more broadly,
are key sites of knowledge production that engage in a crucial critique
of North Atlantic episteme and infrastructures of information. Yet the
*RSHHGG* and other Caribbean periodicals like it are rarely cited by
scholars outside Haiti. Indeed, we argue that it is precisely *because*
Caribbean sites of knowledge production exist outside of---and in
critique of---North Atlantic infrastructures of information that it
becomes acceptable, common even, for scholarship produced outside Haiti
to leave them uncited and unread.[^1] Such a blind spot is even more
remarkable today, as North Atlantic scholars express ever more interest
in Haiti's role in the Age of Revolution and studies of the Atlantic
world. Put otherwise: If the Haitian Revolution is central to the study
of the Atlantic world, why not Haitian histories and Haitian
historians?[^2]

The gap between the vital importance of Haiti's premier social science
journal and its relative lack of impact in North Atlantic scholarship
led to the creation of the [RSHHGG Lab](http://rshhgglab.com/), an
interactive online index of the nearly century's worth of knowledge
produced in the *RSHHGG*.[^3] Developed at the intersection of
disciplinary fields and in cooperation with various institutional
partners, including the Société haïtienne d'histoire, de géographie et
de géologie (SHHGG), the Library of Congress's Labs and John W. Kluge
Center, the Catholic University of America, and George Washington
University, this cross-boundary collaborative digital project was
designed to expand the impact of this crucial repository of Haitian
social science research. The project developed along the same lines of
what Marlene Daut has recently theorized as "a Haitian-informed digital
praxis---centered on access, content, context, and collaboration."[^4]
It is an open-access, multilingual website (available in
[English](http://rshhgglab.com/),
[French](http://rshhgglab.com/francais/), and
[Kreyol](http://rshhgglab.com/kreyol/)) that features a [searchable
index](http://rshhgglab.com/search/) of every article published in the
*RSHHGG*, a growing collection of [article
annotations](http://rshhgglab.com/annotations/) from Haitian and
non-Haitian scholars and researchers, and a space for
[experimentation](http://rshhgglab.com/experiments/).

This essay analyzes the role that experimental work played in the
multi-institutional, cross-boundary collaborative construction of this
DH project. Here, we understand experimentation to be a mindset, an
attitude of "try it and see what happens" through iterative small risks
and an openness to involving others and changing direction. This
approach draws on the spirit of collaboration, experimentation, and
sharing that informs the [LC Labs](https://labs.loc.gov/) initiative at
the Library of Congress, and the *revue* (magazine-journal) as a print
space of exchange, confrontation, and collective creation.[^5] Following
recent reflections on information maintenance and care ethics, we agree
that infrastructures of information maintenance are often invisible and
institutionally siloed and often reproduce structures of oppression and
silencing.[^6] We aim here to highlight the institutional and
infrastructural experimentation and labor necessary to create what is,
essentially, a project of information management: making a key
repository of knowledge usable, discoverable, and accessible. The
authors contend that experimental work was central to successfully
working within---and also challenging---extant infrastructures of
information maintenance in order to achieve an independent, sustainable
project with room to grow and transform.

In what follows, we consider the process of knowledge-creation in the
history of the SHHGG and the nearly one-hundred-year existence of its
*Revue*, the process of indexing this original source material into
database form, and transforming this database into a workable digital
product. In each of these stages, experimentation and cross-boundary
collaboration were key---between the humanities and library science
disciplines, between expectations and realities, and between multiple
languages and registers: Kreyol, French, English, and code. In attending
to the various processes of experimentation that underwrote the RSHHGG
Lab, the authors hope to demonstrate the fruitfulness of cross-boundary
collaborative projects and, ultimately, to advocate for more
infrastructures of experimentation in many forms: research leave, labs,
residencies, and further creative approaches to blurring the boundaries
of labor.

## The Haitian State, Politics, and the Evolution of the Société haïtienne d'histoire, de géographie et de géologie and its *Revue*

In 2019, the Société haïtienne d'histoire, de géographie et de géologie
celebrated its ninety-sixth anniversary.[^7] Its survival is no small
feat: Haitian society has long experienced the kind of tumult that takes
down those institutions in civil society committed to critical
reflection, knowledge, and scientific research. The SHHGG is considered
the eldest among Haiti's scientific, educational institutions, perhaps
the oldest learned society in the Caribbean region still in existence
today. Its press organ, the *Revue de la Société haïtienne d'histoire,
de géographie et de géologie*, is a standard bearer and scientific
publication of reference in Haiti, given that so few scientific
periodicals are currently published in Haiti, especially with
regularity. In many respects, the *Revue* attests to the level of
critical reflection, studies, and research in social sciences undertaken
in Haiti, by Haitians. These background paragraphs are designed to give
an idea of the evolution of the SHHGG and the *Revue* from 1923 to today
and the importance of these institutions in the intellectual sphere and
the world of scientific research in Haiti. By bearing witness to the
century of knowledge produced within the pages of the *Revue*, we hope
to shed light on the stakes of information infrastructures that do not
sufficiently render this knowledge accessible.

The society was founded officially on 8 December 1923 during the
political and military occupation of Haiti by the United States
(1915--34).[^8] A group of notable historians, professors,
intellectuals, and politicians came together with the goal of producing
historical works of scientific value on Haiti's history in order to
loosen the grip of the US occupation.[^9] The society's first president,
Horacius Pauléus Sannon, echoed these efforts in one of his early
speeches, excerpted here: "In times of great crisis, all people
instinctively look back to their history to find lessons of collective
patriotism, new rules of conduct either to better defend their
threatened existence, or to lift themselves back up after they fall. . .
. Each people's history is the unique source from which flows or renews,
depending on the circumstances, its legitimate and indestructible
national aspirations."[^10] To achieve these political goals, the
society defined a set of concrete objectives: to create a list of the
country's private archives that related to national history and
geography; to establish a complete, accurate index of scholarly works
dedicated to Haitian history and geography by Haitian or foreign
authors; to encourage the publication of works aimed at making Haiti
better known from a historical and geographical point of view; and to
facilitate the diffusion of historical and geographical knowledge among
the Haitian people.

The first issue of the *Revue* appeared on 1 May 1925 under the title
*Bulletin de la Société* *d'histoire et de géographie d'Haïti* and
quickly filled a gap in Haitian society.[^11] Because of a lack of
funds, the second issue was not published until December 1926. In this
second issue, the board of directors replaced the name *bulletin* with
*revue*, which has been maintained to the present day, and the journal
name later reflected the changes to the society's name (see note 7).
Though it was born out of the political circumstances of the US
occupation, the SHHGG as an institution exists independently of the
Haitian state and works to maintain its existence outside the government
or a political regime. Put otherwise: the SHHGG is not an institution
formed by the political authority of the state, but in its own sphere of
work it contributes to the development of the Haitian state.[^12] The
society's collaboration with government bodies (notably with the
Ministry of National Education, the Ministry of Foreign Affairs, and
more recently with the Ministry of Culture) can be fruitful or fraught,
depending on political circumstances. The well-known saying is that the
society does not get involved with government politics. For the most
part, the members of the management committee have always tried to
maintain the autonomy of the organization's operations, its independence
as an association, and its status as a learned society in the face of
power. Nevertheless, an individual member can be involved in a
particular government as she sees fit. Indeed, the society has often
been led by key figures who have occupied high-ranking positions in the
state and the university, while several Haitian presidents were close to
the SHHGG. By commitment to maintain a division between the actions of
individual members and the autonomy of the organization, the society has
weathered the convulsions and commotions so favored in the country's
political arena. The existence of the SHHGG first and foremost!

This is not to say that political turmoil has not had an impact on the
society and the *Revue*. On the contrary, Haiti's political
transformations have had repercussions, directly or indirectly, on the
evolution of the SHHGG and the *Revue* either in terms of financial
resources or the integration of new historians, researchers, and young
professionals in its activities. Today, the current 2018--19 political
crisis---known as *peyi lòk* (country lock)---has negatively affected
the production of the journal, the society's main office, the financial
resources needed to publish the *Revue*, and the general ability to
realize the SHHGG's programming.

{% include image.html
  img="issue04/stieber/stieber-image_1.png"
  title="Data Visualization"
  caption="Figure 1. Number of articles per year in *Revue de la Société haïtienne d'histoire, de géographie et de géologie*, 1925--2016." %}

With the benefit of data visualization from the RSHHGG Lab index, the
impact of the Duvalier dictatorship on the *Revue*'s output is clear,
though it warrants some additional contextualization here.[^13] When
François Duvalier came to power in 1957, Jean Price-Mars was president
of the society. In declining health, Price-Mars had planned to hand over
leadership of the organization to a joint group of young historians:
Leslie F. Manigat (future president of the Republic), Gérard Mentor
Laurent, and Hénock Trouillot. But under Duvalier's increasingly
repressive regime, Manigat and Laurent left the country, one after the
other---albeit for different reasons and by different means. Only the
intrepid Trouillot, a faithful disciple of the social theorist
Price-Mars, remained to take the reins.

Many could assume that the society and the *Revue* during Hénock
Trouillot's tenure were simply a tool for Duvalierist propaganda. After
all, Duvalier and Trouillot knew each other well: Duvalier had
previously cowritten articles for the *Revue* with Lorimer Denis and had
even participated in some of the society's activities.[^14]
Nevertheless, Trouillot chose not to align the SHHGG behind Duvalier's
regime and did not turn the *Revue* into an outlet for the political
discourse of Duvalierism. As such, Trouillot assumed sole responsibility
for the society and for the *Revue* for eighteen years at a time when
many intellectuals had left Haiti under the dictatorship. During the
1960s and 1970s Trouillot did his utmost, sometimes at his own expense
and through his sole intellectual labor, to publish the *Revue*. In
comparison to other decades of the *Revue*, his was a modest output but
one that allowed the society and its project to survive.

Without institutional or managerial support, the weight of these
professional and intellectual obligations took a toll on Trouillot's
health. At the initiative of a group of intellectuals, including the
renowned historians Jean Fouchard and Gérard Mentor Laurent (back in
Haiti after a diplomatic mission to Africa), the Ministry of Education
asked Trouillot to retire as the head of the society. Mentor Laurent
presided over a new executive committee, which had been appointed to
restructure the society. The 1980s marked a new era for the society and
the *Revue*. Under the leadership of Alain Turnier, the society created
its history prize and welcomed the first woman into the organization's
leadership, the specialist of library science Françoise Thybulle, who
was then director of the Bibliothèque nationale d'Haïti.[^15] After the
fall of Jean-Claude Duvalier and the end of the Duvalier dictatorship in
February 1986, a new group of scholars joined the management committee,
including Michel Hector, Suzy Castor, Gusti-Klara Gaillard, and Pierre
Buteau. Hector served for fifteen years as president (2000--2015), and
it is with great sadness that the authors of this article acknowledge
his passing on 5 July 2019.[^16]

Today, Pierre Buteau serves as president of the society, and the
management committee is comprised of Guerdy Lissade, vice-president;
Watson Denis, general secretary; Ampidu Lewis Clorméus, secretary; and
advisory board members Gusti- Klara Gaillard-Pourchet, Itazienne Eugène,
Marc-Antoine Archin, Michel Acacia, Gladys Berrouet, and Marc Désir.
Membership in the SHHGG is work of charity, goodwill, and patriotism; no
one receives a salary. In the spirit of reconstruction and renewal that
followed the terrible earthquake of 12 January 2010, the society has
taken steps to contribute to this common project of rebuilding Haiti.
Since 2013, the SHHGG has leased a space where it can organize academic
activities and cultural programming (conferences, book launches, history
workshops, seminars, debates, and meetings of all kinds). The *Revue*
has followed suit. Since 2011, the management committee has adopted
norms and protocols for the presentation and submission of articles and
essays. These have greatly facilitated the editorial work of the
*Revue*, most notably regarding the uniformization of articles and the
quality and level of the publication.

{% include image.html
  img="issue04/stieber/stieber-image_2.jpg"
  title="Cover Art"
  caption="Figure 2. Cover art, *Revue de la Société haïtienne d'histoire, de géographie et de géologie*." %}

## Decolonizing Infrastructures of Information Maintenance

Multiple levels of experimentation and cross-boundary collaboration
shaped the conception, design, and realization of the RSHHGG Lab digital
index project. The project itself developed during Chelsea Stieber's
research fellowship at the John W. Kluge Center at the Library of
Congress for the academic year 2016--17. It is important to note,
however, that she had not applied specifically for a DH residence; she
was there to complete research on her book project on civil war and
factionalism in postindependence Haitian writing. Nevertheless, because
of the cross-boundary work encouraged within the Kluge Center and the LC
Labs initiative specifically, she was given the time, space, and
resources (Kluge interns, [LC Labs
fellows](https://labs.loc.gov/people/), technology, and expertise) to
pursue the project.[^17] It would be useful, then, to first understand
the process by which the need for the index became clear.

If, as we maintain in the introduction to this essay, Caribbean
periodicals are crucial sites of knowledge production, why does
scholarship produced *outside* the Caribbean leave them uncited and
unread? Or, to return to our opening gambit: If the Haitian Revolution
is central to the study of the Atlantic World, why not Haitian histories
and Haitian historians? Here, let us make the case more clearly
regarding the silencing of twentieth-century Caribbean periodicals
within North Atlantic infrastructures of information maintenance via
Stieber's experience with the periodical in the Library of Congress.

Stieber's residence at the Kluge Center was focused on the Library of
Congress's vast collection of locally produced Haitian scholarship:
monographs, newspapers, and journals, mostly from the twentieth century.
Her emphasis on locally produced print materials, especially
periodicals, is part of a larger research imperative that she has called
attention to in her other work.[^18] She had dedicated a large portion
of her time to working her way through the nearly full run of the
*RSHHGG* in the library's holdings, one of the only such collections
that exists in the United States, observing research trends, identifying
notable contributors, and flagging articles to read in full. She quickly
realized that it would not be so easy. A catalog search of the
periodical revealed only the most basic information,
"History---Periodicals," and no indication of the contents of individual
issues. This periodical, one of the Caribbean's most important social
science journals, was virtually opaque to normal scholarly searching
practices. More onerous still, the early issues through 1950 were only
available on microfilm.

{% include image.html
  img="issue04/stieber/stieber-image_3.png"
  title="Library of Congress Catalog Entry"
  caption="Figure 3. Library of Congress catalog entry for the *Revue de la Société haïtienne d\'histoire, de géographie et de géologie*." %}

Stieber's initial exploratory research into these questions identified
two main reasons for this lack of engagement with Haitian scholarly and
intellectual production: language and accessibility. The primary
language of Haitian scholarship is French and, more recently, Haitian
Kreyol---barriers to access for most anglophone scholars. The question
of accessibility is not only linguistic, however, nor is it unique to
Haitian periodicals. Rather, it has to do with infrastructures of
information maintenance: the indexing and library cataloguing practices
for scholarly periodicals.

The Library of Congress's depth of reference staff and subject
librarians allowed Stieber to connect quickly by phone with a reference
staff in the Newspaper and Current Periodical Reading Room. She learned
that when libraries process incoming periodicals, they create a catalog
entry that includes the basic information about the publication: title,
publisher, frequency, and a basic subject heading. While libraries will
routinely update the catalog record with the most recent holdings,
adding catalog notes on editors, reprints, and other information, these
catalog records do not index the *contents* of the periodical itself:
the different article titles, author names, and subject headings for
each issue. Which is to say, there was nothing specific to the
Caribbeanness of the *RSHHGG* that rendered it opaque within the library
catalog. All periodicals, from the *American Historical Review* (*AHR*)
to the modernist magazine *The Dial* are more or less illegible in the
library catalog. Indeed, this is precisely how the catalog is designed
to work, as the reference staff explained. While in the predigital past,
researchers would use the printed volume index of the specific
periodical that interested them, today, virtually all North Atlantic
scholarly periodicals have searchable indexes online via JSTOR,
ProQuest, or Project MUSE, for example. Crucially, these periodicals
have also merged their archives onto these digital platforms: the *AHR*
is searchable and browsable from volume 1 (1895) to present.

But it is the comparison between Caribbean scholarly periodicals and
modernist magazines (rather than North Atlantic scholarly periodicals)
that is, we think, a more fruitful one. Modernist magazines were long
thought of as the excluded or silenced site of knowledge creation and
artistic experimentation in twentieth-century infrastructures of
information maintenance. Their ephemeral, countercultural, and
avant-garde status meant that they did not assimilate easily into the
catalog or the archive, which was often their purpose in the first
place: to challenge epistemological frames, systems of value, and
notions of art. But they have long since been attended to, and we would
venture, never really silenced: they have been chronicled in scholarly
monographs and articles, in anthologies, and, in the last twenty years,
in massive, sustained digital archiving projects, such as the [Modernist
Journals Project](http://modjourn.org/mjp.slogan.html).[^19] Yet for the
*RSHHGG*, and for most other foreign-language, non-US-based scholarly
periodicals from earlier in the twentieth century, there is no such
searchable index, no such online platform for their archives.

The absence of care or maintenance work for Caribbean scholarly
periodicals is in no small part a result of their marginal status within
the Western episteme and their distance from the dominant discourses and
arbiters of North Atlantic scholarly production. While modernist
magazines were avant-garde and enjoyed a provocative, outsider status to
the dominant norms of late Victorian or nineteenth-century art,
literature, and culture, they nevertheless made this critique from
within Western institutions and infrastructures. We cannot say the same
for Haitian scholarly periodicals, which produced their knowledge
outside the dominant Western discourse, in their own centers of
knowledge and episteme. Non-Western or non-North Atlantic scholarly
periodicals are inscrutable in the catalog and, as a result, are
silent---and silenced---in North Atlantic scholarship, even, perversely,
scholarship that purports to be on or about these regions. We therefore
believe it is absolutely necessary for North Atlantic scholars to engage
Haitian-based scholarly and intellectual production when they are
writing and thinking about Haiti. In short: we need new structures of
information maintenance that render visible, legible, and searchable the
scholarly and intellectual production that exists outside the dominant
(Western) infrastructure---precisely because this work challenges the
logic and episteme of these dominant frames.

The complex interplay of silence, inequity, and illegibility
(re)produced between infrastructures of information maintenance and
North Atlantic scholarship led Stieber to a series of provocations,
elaborated in dialogue with the [*Small Axe
Archipelagos*](http://smallaxe.net/sxarchipelagos/index.html) project,
that informed the shape of the project to come: How can we unsilence
locally produced Caribbean knowledge within North Atlantic
infrastructures of information maintenance and render if more accessible
and legible for a public that should be reading and citing it? In the
process of doing this, how can we ensure that we are doing this work in
a way that actually strengthens the infrastructures and institutions in
the Caribbean that generated this work? Finally, might we be able to
decolonize North Atlantic research and citational practices on and about
the Caribbean by indexing and making more accessible and legible key
resources in twentieth-century Caribbean scholarly and intellectual
production?[^20]

{% include image.html
  img="issue04/stieber/stieber-image_4.png"
  title="Collections as Data"
  caption="Figure 4. Chelsea Stieber, *Collections as Data*, Library of Congress, 25 July 2017."
  url="\[https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=OJWMHzgCu3c&amp;feature=youtu.be&amp;t=6h35m14s" %}

## Cross-Boundary Collaboration as Experimentation

The creation of the searchable index was possible only through
multi-institutional, cross-boundary collaborative experimentation. Here,
we will narrate collaborative work that was central to successfully
working within---and also challenging---extant infrastructures of
information maintenance in order to make scholarly production from Haiti
legible to non-Haitian scholars who are writing and thinking about
Haiti. First and foremost was to secure support from the SHHGG, which
Stieber considered the primary stakeholder in the project. If the idea
was indeed to make Haitian scholarly production accessible, it was also
to create an information infrastructure that directly involved the
institution, organizational structures, and people involved with the
SHHGG. The society expressed their support for the indexing project but
reiterated their opposition to any digitization because of valid
concerns that digitization alone would not ensure North Atlantic
scholars' engagement with Haiti and its institutions (what Daut rightly
calls "the 'Columbusing' of Haitian-produced scholarship").[^21] By
engaging the SHHGG as a stakeholder in the project, Stieber connected
with the organization's general secretary, Watson Denis, who became an
invaluable liaison to the society and a central collaborator for the
indexing project.

In a stroke of coincidence and true luck, Adam Silvia, a seasoned
Caribbeanist and digital humanist, had just arrived at the Library of
Congress to start a new job. A historian by training, Silvia had long
believed that the *RSHHGG* was a precious resource that deserved wider
use among scholars. He offered crucial advice in this early stage of the
project, setting up a workflow to index the contents of the journal in
order to make them accessible, legible, and discoverable. It is this
first stage of infrastructural information maintenance that is both the
most laborious and often the most invisible.[^22] It would not do to
give it short shrift here. Over the course of a calendar year, Silvia
(off the clock, in his personal time); a Kluge Center intern, Chadwick
Dunefsky; and a Catholic University of America PhD candidate and
graduate research assistant, Maria Jose Gutierrez, assisted Stieber in
indexing the contents of each issue of the periodical into a database
that recorded author, title, issue and volume numbers, notes, and
library location (1,381 items in all). The Catholic University of
America Interlibrary Loan Staff provided invaluable assistance tracking
down newer or missing issues. Without the care and expertise of these
contributors, the project would not have been possible.

As the indexing phase neared completion, the LC Labs and visiting
librarian Laura Wrubel provided Stieber invaluable guidance and
consultation on how to turn this dataset into an index on a digital
platform. The "guiding principles" of accessibility and sustainability
that Stieber brought to this next stage of the project were essential to
narrow down all the possibilities and stick to the guiding ethos of the
project. The accessibility piece was inspired by the Small
Axe Archipelagos project, which emphasizes critical thinking in digital
humanities scholarship in order to "encourage collaboration with,
increase accessibility for, and otherwise work to narrow the gap between
Caribbeanist researchers, especially those in the North Atlantic
academy, and the communities we are committed to serving."[^23] The
sustainability piece came from the principles of minimal computing
utilized by Alex Gil and others, which advocates finding a balance
between "high-performance" technology and a sustainable, data "light"
site (ideal for Caribbean users who access on their mobile phones using
3G data) that is easy to maintain in the long-term.[^24]

Wrubel, a librarian and software developer at George Washington
University, was at that time commencing three months of research leave,
pursuing professional development goals related to digital scholarship
and computational analysis of library collections.[^25] Librarians at
George Washington University are granted the opportunity---relatively
unique in academic librarianship---to propose research leave projects of
up to six months in support of goals related to research, teaching, and
professional development. Wrubel's goals included developing her
expertise with software tools for analysis and exploration of library
digital collections; contributing to the efforts of LC Labs to implement
services for digital scholarship at Library of Congress; and
experimenting with the Library of Congress resources, such as their
APIs, to create demonstration projects and documentation.

As background, in 2016, the Library of Congress commissioned a study of
library digital scholarship services and conducted a pilot in order to
provide recommendations about how the library could more robustly
support digital methods and computational analysis using their
collections.[^26] The report recommended development of a lab that would
foster experimentation and provide expertise for researchers, including
Kluge scholars, in use of digital collections and related workflows and
tools. It recommended that a Library of Congress Lab be accessible to
all and provide instruction and access to data scholarship methods for
research with digital collections. As a visiting librarian in LC Labs,
Wrubel sought to contribute to the LC Labs team's efforts to gain
experience with the needs of digital scholarship projects and foster
experiments that would inspire others. The team had already been
facilitating the work of Kluge scholars studying digital collections,
and it was through their bridge-building that Wrubel was connected with
Stieber.

At the start of their collaboration, Wrubel took on the role of a
facilitator of experimentation. As a librarian working with faculty and
students to apply technological and often exploratory approaches to
their research, this was a role with which she had experience. She first
sought to understand the story of the RSHHGG Lab project to that date,
including Stieber's immediate goals for the project and her dreams for
its future, as well as the agreed-upon guidelines set forth by the
SHHGG's executive committee.[^27] This conversation was similar in some
ways to the "whiteboard dream containment technique" in which the
interpreter (Wrubel) and her colleagues in LC Labs would take the
preliminary ideas about the shape of the project as envisioned by the
dreamer (Stieber), draw out requirements, and "reduce the scope of the
project to a minimally viable interpretation in which the dreamer still
recognizes her initial desires."[^28] Wrubel would work with Stieber to
develop an achievable path for the project that would meet her
short-term goal to make the *RSHHGG*'s contents discoverable, on a
platform she could take forward beyond the project's origins at Library
of Congress, all while respecting her guiding principles of
accessibility and sustainability. Through these conversations, Wrubel
and Stieber developed the technical requirements for this online version
of the project. It needed to

- display citations from the journal by year, tag, author, and
possibly other ways;
- support searching citations by keyword in any field including
abstract;
- be searchable or browseable by tag;
- load quickly on mobile devices with limited bandwidth;
- show the work as it's completed (annotations and citations were to
be added over time); and
- be easy to customize and maintain, as well as be portable and
independent of any organizational home.

The last item was of particular concern, since both Stieber and Wrubel
were working on this project while on a fellowship and research leave,
respectively. Although Stieber was pursuing funding from other sources,
RSHHGG Lab needed to survive independent of any particular institution's
support and to facilitate the future integration of other partners. In
addition to supporting the goals of the project as a whole, the platform
must require minimal technical effort and funding to update, migrate,
and keep current; allow others to contribute to the technical and
data-related work of the project; and provide an exit strategy for the
data, to enable future migrations to other platforms. These criteria
relate directly to accessibility, sustainability and maintenance
considerations.

At the initial stage of the work, Stieber and Wrubel examined the
article data Stieber and her team had created in their work with the
*RSHHGG*'s print volumes. The approximately eight hundred citations they
created were in a Google Sheet, with columns for each citation field.
Google Sheets had proven helpful in supporting collaboration on data
entry but did not enforce consistent metadata practices. As a result of
the many participants in data entry, inconsistencies in formatting and
gaps crept into the citations. For example, date formats varied, start
and end pages were in the same column, and varying placeholder text was
used for articles with no authors. Wrubel identified clean-up tasks that
would make the citation data more amenable to transformation into other
formats and usable in digital platforms. This work surfaced the value of
collaborating with a librarian throughout the process but especially in
the initial stages to plan how data will be gathered and managed in a
digital project. Early consideration of data structure and formats can
enable easier integration and transformation later.

While this data clean-up was continuing, Wrubel investigated platforms
that met the requirements of the project, prioritizing those that would
enable Stieber to control the data and its presentation, and would be
appropriate for her and her collaborators' technical skills and
resources. Zotero had emerged as a key part of the technical approach,
since it provides easy management of large numbers of citations and data
portability. Wrubel wrote a [*Python
script*](https://gist.github.com/lwrubel/e6e8acfa6318771fa4383cabec05f798)
for a one-time transformation of a CSV (comma-separated values) export
of the data in the Google Sheet into the RIS format (citation format
developed by Research Information Systems)that is easily imported into
Zotero. She walked Stieber through the Python code, ensuring that
Stieber had Python set up on her own laptop so she would be empowered to
work with the data and tools herself or with other collaborators.

To understand the affordances of possible platforms, Wrubel created
several prototypes using similar citation data. Prototyping helped
Wrubel understand and communicate each approach's features, setup and
maintenance needs, and trade-offs. Prototyping allowed Stieber to
envision how each approach might manifest and to make decisions about
the project as an informed collaborator. To more speedily set up
prototypes, Wrubel used Docker, containerization software for deploying
applications and their dependencies, which draws on a public repository
of images for these containers. WordPress and Omeka both were available
as Docker images that Wrubel could download and deploy with minimal
setup and configuration.

WordPress with the [*Zotpress
plug-in*](https://wordpress.org/plugins/zotpress/) offered the easiest
setup and maintenance and flexibility in how the site looks and works,
and it took advantage of Zotero's ease of managing large numbers of
citations. Hosting for WordPress is widely available, including from
Reclaim Hosting, and it has simple themes available for supporting fast
load times. No server administrator is required, and a GUI (graphical
user interface) admin site is available for managing the site. The
Zotpress plug-in displays citations from Zotero, retrieved in real-time
via Zotero's API (application programming interface) and has various
filters available. All components were actively being updated and
maintained. Setting up the prototype helped demonstrate the limitations
of options for displaying items, such as the lack of API support for a
query by volume number, a common need for journal data. Also, display is
based on a live API call, so results can take a second or two to load,
no matter what the user's bandwidth.

Wrubel also prototyped an Omeka site that used the Zotero Import
plug-in. This approach requires more manual effort to configure and load
data. The Omeka web-publishing software for exhibits and digital
collection allows the user to import citations from Zotero as items to
display in an exhibit. Because data is usually loaded only once, not
changed over time, it would work better with a finished project with a
complete set of citations and annotations.

Wrubel also explored the static site generator Jekyll but did not
recommend it to Stieber. While Jekyll is lightweight, widely used, and
customizable with plug-ins, this project had too many citations to
manually maintain within the Jekyll pages and posts framework. Adding
searchability through a plug-in such as lunr.js would be cumbersome,
considering the number of records (citations). It is against the grain
of Jekyll usage to integrate a database, nor was there at the time a
Zotero plug-in for Jekyll. Wrubel also looked at Open Journal Systems,
an open-source journal hosting platform that provides built-in
navigation for a journal. While its website structure and layout matches
the shape of the project, it requires either a system administrator or
developer to set it up and maintain it or third-party hosting, which
requires funding on an annual subscription basis.

Based on the review of options, Stieber selected the WordPress and
Zotpress platform. In addition to the advantages already described, she
knew that at her home institution there were graduate students and
librarians knowledgeable about WordPress and Zotero and that therefore
those applications would more easily enable future collaboration. We
must acknowledge the contributors, maintainers, and communities behind
the software and platforms we explored and used in this project.[^29]
These open-source projects are critical infrastructure for digital
projects such as RSHHGG Lab. And while we ended up not selecting Jekyll
or Omeka, using them in our prototyping helped us clarify our needs and
contributed to our understanding of how the project might develop in the
future. The process of experimentally configuring projects with a small
set of citation data revealed the affordances of each tool, highlighting
the consequences of any set of design choices and feeding our
imaginations of what a fully developed lab site could offer.

## Creating a Searchable Online Index

Wrubel's Python script, while simple, was the keystone to being able to
move the database from CSV to a useable, searchable, accessible online
platform. This transition to the final WordPress phase came at a good
time: Wrubel had since returned to George Washington University and
assumed her regular duties. Stieber, now back at Catholic University
herself, would (in theory) be able to manage the WordPress setup and
ZotPress integration on her own. In another stroke of luck, Anne Nguyen,
a brilliant high school senior at Thomas Jefferson High School for
Science and Technology was eager to experiment with her knowledge of
French and computer science. She spent a few weeks of her summer break
working on tagging schemes and cleaning up the Zotero bibliography.
Christian James, a web application librarian at Catholic University
Libraries, also proved indispensable in the site-building phase, helping
Stieber to work out kinks in the ZotPress code and consulting as
needed.[^30] The end result: a relatively data-light site that queried
our original (and easily updatable) Zotero bibliography through a
searchable index by item, by tag, and with a "browse by" option. Because
of our emphasis on legibility and accessibility, we provided the main
site information, including directions for searching, browsing, and
about the lab, in English, French, and Kreyol. Paul Belony, PhD,
provided Kreyol translations for the site, while Karine Belizar, a PhD
candidate at Louisiana State University, provided French translations.

Because the project was designed to be more than just an index, Stieber
sought ideas for how to make it into a dynamic space of collaboration
and exchange that would bridge the North Atlantic/Haitian divide. Here,
Adam Silvia's previous experience curating the project [*An Island
Luminous*](http://islandluminous.fiu.edu/) was invaluable.[^31] Silvia
suggested a model of scholarly annotations similar to that project: we
would send out a call for collaborators to researchers of all levels
throughout Haiti and the North Atlantic (primarily the United States,
Canada, and France) in
[English](http://rshhgglab.com/call-for-collaborators-rshhgg-lab/),
[French](http://rshhgglab.com/appel-aux-collaborateurs-le-labo-rshhgg/),
and [Kreyol](http://rshhgglab.com/apel-pou-kolaborasyon/).[^32] Because
the articles themselves would not be accessible, the idea was to create
an online, collaborative space for scholars inside and outside Haiti to
write short summaries of articles they had used from the journal for
their own research. The annotations are a space especially of research
collaboration and cross-boundary collaboration: they indicate if and in
what publication the original journal article has been cited and are
beginning to link to related digital scholarly projects (such as the
[Radio Haiti Archive](https://repository.duke.edu/dc/radiohaiti)).[^33]
During this process, Nathan Dize, a PhD candidate at Vanderbilt
University, was instrumental. He outlined a social media and
communications strategy and worked with [contributing
annotators](http://rshhgglab.com/collaborators/).[^34] Many of these
main project partners have themselves contributed article annotations to
the site, all of which you can find [in the site's annotations
section](http://rshhgglab.com/annotations/). The site also seeks to be
useful to its other stakeholders---the researchers who use and
contribute to it---as academic "capital" on a curriculum vitae or in a
promotion dossier. To that end, we have maintained a scholarly editing
process: Matthew Casey, a historian at the University of Southern
Mississippi, serves as the English-language annotations editor, and
Vanessa Mongey, a historian at Newcastle University (UK), is the
French-language annotations editor.

So far, the site has achieved its goal of increasing the searchability
and accessibility of the journal: in its first year, it logged nearly
twenty thousand visits and received positive feedback from Haitian and
North Atlantic scholars alike. Marlene Daut has recently called the site
a "model for a digital project that has the capacity to ensure that
Haitian scholars are neither silenced nor exploited in this moment of
resurgent interest in Haitian history."[^35] Still, there remain
processes to be improved and further outreach to be done. The
flexibility for experimentation provided by a non--institutionally bound
project also created a spotty, ad-hoc workflow that we need to improve.
Moreover, while there has been fruitful collaboration with Haitian
scholars, we can do more to create an egalitarian, collaborative
scholarly exchange, primarily through groundwork and outreach in Haiti.

Stieber participated in one such outreach event when she visited the
headquarters of the SHHGG in November 2018. She presented the project
and its successes in making Haitian scholarly production accessible
while also creating a system that directly involved the institution,
infrastructure, and people involved with the SHHGG. Having laid the
framework for a collaborative digital space that serves North Atlantic
scholars *and* Haitian researchers, we hope a next step can be to work
with the SHHGG to create a digital archive of the *RSHHGG.* The idea
would be to use a more traditional journal storage site using the
[Public Knowledge Project's Open Journals
System](https://pkp.sfu.ca/ojs/) or some other open-source software CMS
(content management system), which would be geared primarily to North
Atlantic scholars.[^36] In light of the constraints on data usage and
insufficient WiFi in Haiti, we would also create a physical archive on
external hard drives, thumb drives, or, in an ideal situation, a
Raspberry Pi minicomputer that would be geared toward a local, Haitian
scholarly community.[^37] Because the device does not need to be
connected to the internet and can emit its own WiFi signal, users
(patrons of the SHHGG reading room or perhaps another library or
community center) could connect to the archive with phones, tablets, or
computers and download directly without using data. Such a setup would
allow us to create a more vibrant, dynamic community space centered on
the exchange and creation of knowledge.

## Conclusion

The case of the *RSHHGG* and its silence in North Atlantic scholarship
is far from unique. Scholarly and cultural knowledge from the
Caribbean---and the global South more broadly---sits in the pages of
unindexed periodicals. The opacity or unsearchability of locally
produced, nonanglophone scholarly periodicals like the *RSHHGG* (from
the Caribbean, Latin America, and elsewhere in the global South) is
especially important to recognize *and rectify* because these are the
scholarly sites---and centers---of local scholarly and intellectual
production. In the spirit of experimentation and the "Lab," we have just
launched our first [experiment](http://rshhgglab.com/experiments/) on
the site: a crowd-sourced list of locally produced Caribbean
periodicals.[^38] It is our hope that we can further emphasize the
importance of locally produced Caribbean periodicals as sites of
knowledge production that challenge dominant ways of knowing and
infrastructures of information and catalyze additional projects to
render them accessible and legible.

There are many models for institutionally structuring the work of
digital scholarship, from centers to collectives, and for fostering
partnerships among scholars, librarians, archivists, and
technologists.[^39] Stieber, Wrubel, and Denis's collaborative effort
overlapped with several organizational support arrangements, developing
fluidly as the project's context changed. This changing context allowed
for experimentation less bound by institutional mandates or competing
responsibilities, and yet these collaborations also provided benefits to
many home organizations over time. LC Labs gained experience supporting
Kluge scholars and facilitating digital projects, while also being able
to showcase a "collections as data" project that could inspire others to
explore Library of Congress collections. Wrubel's institution benefits
from her deepened experience with digital scholarship projects, exposure
to digital humanities projects, and practical understanding of tools.
She has been able to draw on what she learned from this project to
facilitate and advise others in her library and academic community.
Stieber's institution benefitted from the visibility of her project in
the world and the new insights and methodologies for scholarly practice
that she brings to her teaching and research. Denis and the SHHGG
received greater visibility and impact while maintaining the scholarly
and intellectual capital of their work within their institutional
infrastructures at home. We and our many partners are experimenters and
collaborators but also information maintainers who have the
responsibility and opportunity to ensure the continued existence of an
entry point to this periodical. We look forward to adapting and
experimenting as we continue to the next stage of the RSHHGG Lab.

---

[^1]: This is not to say that the *RSHHGG* and its scholarly production
    have not traveled outside the country; specialists of Haitian
    studies, such as David Geggus, Carolyn Fick, Laurent Dubois, Sibylle
    Fischer, Jacques Cauna, and Matthew Smith, have long recognized the
    importance of the resource and used it in their own research. They
    utilized the journal's scholarly production despite its relative
    scholarly "obscurity"---precisely because they had a specialist's
    knowledge of its importance. Epigraph: "De plus, le fait que l'étranger ne se fût pas intéressé à ce qui se passait en Haïti, n'autorise pas à conclure qu'il ne s'y fut rien passé"; Michel-Philippe Lerebours, *Haïti et ses peintres: De 1804
    à 1980; souffrances and espoirs d'un peuple*, 2 vols. (Port-au-Prince, Haïti:
    Imprimeur II, 1989), 1:24.

[^2]: On the problem of centering in comparative studies, see Carol
    Boyce Davies, "Beyond Uni-centricity: Transcultural Black
    Presences," *Research in African Literatures* 30, no. 2 (1999):
    96--109; Micol Siegel, "Beyond Compare: Comparative Method after the
    Transnational Turn," *Radical History Review*, no. 91 (2005): 62--90;
    Marlene Daut, "Daring to Be Free / Dying to Be Free: Toward a
    Dialogic Haitian--US Studies," *American Quarterly* 63, no. 2 (2011):
    375--89; and Chelsea Stieber, "Beyond Mentions: New Approaches to
    Comparative Studies of Haiti," *Early American Literature* 53, no. 3
    (2018): 961--75.

[^3]: See RSHHGG Lab, <https://rshhgglab.com/>. The site is also
    available in French (<https://rshhgglab.com/francais/>) and Kreyol
    (<https://rshhgglab.com/kreyol/>).

[^4]: Marlene L. Daut, "Haiti @ the Digital Crossroads: Archiving Black
    Sovereignty," *sx archipelagos*, no 3 (2019),
    [https://smallaxe.net/sxarchipelagos/issue03/daut.html](https://smallaxe.net/sxarchipelagos/issue03/daut.html).

[^5]: On the LC Labs project, see <https://labs.loc.gov/>. On the
    *revue* as experimentation, see Olivier Corpet, "Que vivent des
    revues," *Bulletin des bibliothèques de France* 33, no. 4 (1988):
    282--90.

[^6]: The Information Maintainers: Devon Olson, Jessica Meyerson, Mark
    Parsons, Juliana Castro, Monique Lassere, Dawn Wright, Amelia Acker,
    et al., *Information Maintenance as a Practice of Care* (2019),
    [doi:10.5281/zenodo.3236409](https://doi.org/10.5281/zenodo.3236409).

[^7]: The Société d'histoire et de géographie d'Haïti evolved with time
    and with the broader transformations in Haitian society. The name
    changed as well. In April 1947, as he stepped down as his term as
    president, Jean Price-Mars asked the members to consider adding
    "haïtienne" to the name in order to specify its country of origin.
    In 1950, the executive committee added "géologie." Henceforth, it
    was known as the Société haïtienne d'histoire, de géographie et de
    géologie. While there has been relatively little published on
    geology since that era, it goes without saying that after the
    terrible earthquake on 12 January 2010, geology has reasserted
    itself in Haitian society as an indispensable field of inquiry.

[^8]: The SHHGG has historical antecedents in Haiti, such as the Société
    des sciences et de géographie d'Haïti founded in Port-au-Prince in
    1882.

[^9]: Sannon later clarified that the society was formed in response to
    "a general ignorance of our History" ("une ignorance à peu près
    générale de notre histoire") and with the goal of "guiding minds
    toward the study of history so that the country might one day see a
    writer, or several, take up the original works of \[Thomas\] Madiou,
    \[Joseph\] Saint-Rémy and \[Beaubrun\] Ardouin to update and
    complete them" ("diriger les esprits vers l'étude de l'histoire,
    afin de donner au pays une chance de voir quelque jour un ou des
    écrivains reprendre, pour les renouveler et les achever, les travaux
    de Madiou, de Saint-Rémy et de Ardouin"). Gaétan Mentor, "Esquisse
    historique d'une société savante: La SHHGG ou 90 années au service
    de l'intelligentsia haïtienne," *Revue de la Société haïtienne
    d'histoire, de géographie et de géologie*, nos. 251--52 (2013): 47.
    Unless otherwise indicated, all translations are ours.

[^10]: "Aux heures de grandes crises, tous les peuples se sont
    d'instinct reportés en arrière pour chercher dans leur histoire des
    leçons de patriotisme collectif, de nouvelles règles de conduite,
    soit pour pouvoir mieux défendre leur existence menacé, soit pour se
    relever plus rapidement de leurs chutes. . . . L'histoire de chaque peuple
    est la source unique d'où découlent et ou se renouvellent, selon les
    circonstances, ses légitimes et indestructibles aspirations
    nationales"; Horacius Pauléus Sannon, "Discours de Me. H. Pauléus
    Sannon," *Revue de la Société d'histoire et de géographie d'Haïti*
    5, no. 13 (1934): 4.

[^11]: In 1932, the *Revue* had 134 subscribers, including scholars and
    institutions abroad. The number of subscribers increased and
    decreased depending on the handling and quality of the publication,
    but the management committee has nevertheless always remained
    committed to publishing the *Revue*.

[^12]: In 1930 and by presidential decree, the society was recognized
    for its "public utility." As such, it was to enjoy a certain number
    of rights and privileges accorded by the Haitian state, though in
    practice these were granted only irregularly. Nevertheless, the
    SHHGG has managed to survive financially thanks to membership dues
    and subscriptions to the *Revue*, to the consideration of a few
    important figures, and to the sale of issues of the *Revue*.

[^13]: Information in this segment relies primarily on Mentor, "Esquisse
    historique d'une société savant."

[^14]: See François Duvalier and Lorimer Denis, "Les civilisations de
    l'Afrique noire et le problème haïtien," *Revue de la Société
    d'histoire et de géographie d'Haïti* 7, nos. 21--22 (1936): 19--41;
    François Duvalier and Lorimer Denis, "La civilisation haïtienne:
    Notre mentalité est-elle africaine ou gallo-latin," *Revue de la
    Société d'histoire et de géographie d'Haïti* 7, no. 23 (1936): 1--31.

[^15]: The society's history prize was inaugurated in 1982. The first
    prize was awarded in 1984 to Marcel and Claude B. Auguste for their
    work *L'expédition Leclerc, 1801--1802* and the second prize to
    Emmanuel Justin Castra for his work entitled, *Aux origines de la
    presse haïtienne, 1764--1850*. Between 1986 and 1994, Marc Péan, Suzy
    Castor, Michel Hector, Gusti-Kara Gaillard, Charles Tardieu-Dehoux,
    Léon Denius Pamphile, Guy Pierre, and Claude B. Augsute (again) won
    the prize. In 2015, after a suspension for a variety of reasons, the
    history prize resumed in partnership with the Fondation Roger
    Gaillard. Since the award's return, historians Délide Jospeh and
    Jean Alix René won in 2015 and 2017, respectively.

[^16]: See Watson Denis, "Haïti / Hommage au mapou Michel Hector
    (1932--2019): Professeur, historien et militant politique,"
    *AlterPresse*, 13 July 2019,
    [https://www.alterpresse.org/spip.php?article24537](https://www.alterpresse.org/spip.php?article24537).

[^17]: Stieber worked closely with junior fellows Samantha Herron and
    Luke Menzies.

[^18]: See Chelsea Stieber, "The Haitian Literary Magazine in
    Francophone Postcolonial Literary and Cultural Production," in
    *Beyond Tradition: French Cultural Studies (1800--2014)*, ed. Anne O'Neil-Henry, Kathryn Kleppinger, and Masha Belenky (Newark: University of Delaware Press, 2017).

[^19]: On the Modernist Journals Project, see
    <https://modjourn.org/mjp.slogan.html>. See also Suzanne Churchill's
    Index of Modernist Magazines, <https://modernistmagazines.org/>; and
    the University of Wisconsin-Madison's Little Magazines Collection,
    <https://uwlittlemags.tumblr.com/>. Recently, the Institut national
    d'histoire de l'art embarked on a much-needed revision to the
    West-centric modernist magazine movement with their Seigmography of
    Struggle project, a global history of critical and cultural
    journals and are also constructing a new database of global modernist periodicals; see
    <https://gap.inha.fr/fr/projets/art-global-et-periodiques-culturels/exposition.html> and https://gap.inha.fr/fr/ressources/bibliographies-et-recensements/bases-de-donnees.html.

[^20]: On decolonizing knowledge and the archive, see Achille Mbembe,
    *Decolonizing Knowledge and the Question of the Archive* (Africa Is
    a Country Ebook, 2015),
    [https://africaisacountry.atavist.com/decolonizing-knowledge-and-the-question-of-the-archive](https://africaisacountry.atavist.com/decolonizing-knowledge-and-the-question-of-the-archive.);
    Roopika Risam, *New Digital Worlds: Postcolonial Digital Humanities
    in Theory, Praxis, and Pedagogy* (Evanston, IL: Northwestern
    University Press, 2019); and Jeannette A. Bastian, Stanley H.
    Griffin, and John A. Aarons, *Decolonizing the Caribbean Record: An
    Archives Reader* (Sacramento, CA: Litwin, 2019).

[^21]: Daut, "Haiti @ the Digital Crossroads."

[^22]: The Information Maintainers, *Information Maintenance as a
    Practice of Care*.

[^23]: "About Us," *sx archipelagos*,
    <http://smallaxe.net/sxarchipelagos/about.html>.

[^24]: See "About," Minimal Computing: A Working Group of GO::DH,
    <https://go-dh.github.io/mincomp/about/>.

[^25]: Meghan Ferriter, "Welcoming Laura Wrubel and Exploring Digital
    Scholarship at the Library of Congress," *The Signal* (blog), 20
    November 2017,
    <https://blogs.loc.gov/thesignal/2017/11/welcoming-laura-wrubel-and-exploring-digital-scholarship-at-the-library-of-congress/>.

[^26]: Michelle Gallinger and Daniel Chudnov, for the Library of
    Congress Lab, *Library of Congress Digital Scholars Lab Pilot
    Project Report*, 21 December 2016,
    [https://labs.loc.gov/static/labs/meta/images/DChudnov-MGallinger_LCLabReport.pdf](https://labs.loc.gov/static/labs/meta/images/DChudnov-MGallinger_LCLabReport.pdf).

[^27]: The committee granted us access to all their materials and
    deputized two of their advisory board members to assist us in
    whatever way they could. The committee did, however, as previously
    mentioned, request that we not engage in a digitization project of
    full issues of the *Revue*.

[^28]: Kaiama Glover and Alex Gil, "The Desires of the Humanist: On the
    Interpretation of Digital Caribbean Dreams" (forthcoming).

[^29]: See Python, <https://www.python.org/community/>; Zotero,
    <https://www.zotero.org/support/credits_and_acknowledgments>;
    Jekyll, <https://github.com/jekyll/jekyll#sponsors>; and Omeka,
    <https://omeka.org/about/staff/>.

[^30]: See Christian James's faculty profile,
    [https://lis.catholic.edu/faculty-and-research/faculty-profiles/james-christian/index.html](https://lis.catholic.edu/faculty-and-research/faculty-profiles/james-christian/index.html).

[^31]: See *An Island Luminous*, <https://islandluminous.fiu.edu/>.

[^32]: See "Call for Collaborators: RSHHGG Lab,"
    <https://rshhgglab.com/call-for-collaborators-rshhgg-lab/>; also in
    French ("Appel à collaboration: Le Labo RSHHGG,"
    <https://rshhgglab.com/appel-aux-collaborateurs-le-labo-rshhgg/>) and
    Kreyol ("Apèl pou Kolaborasyon: RSHHGG Lab,"
    <https://rshhgglab.com/apel-pou-kolaborasyon/>).

[^33]: See Duke University Libraries' Radio Haiti Archive,
    <https://repository.duke.edu/dc/radiohaiti>.

[^34]: See "Collaborators," RSHHGG Lab,
    <https://rshhgglab.com/collaborators/>.

[^35]: Daut, "Haiti @ the Digital Crossroads."

[^36]: See Public Knowledge Project, "Open Journals System,"
    <https://pkp.sfu.ca/ojs/>.

[^37]: We could model the idea on an open-source device called the
    KoomBook, researched and developed by Libraries without Borders /
    Bibliothèques sans frontières,
    [https://www.librarieswithoutborders.org/koombook/](https://www.librarieswithoutborders.org/koombook/).
    WiFi is wireless networking technology commonly used for local area
    networking of devices and internet access.

[^38]: See "Locally produced Caribbean Periodicals: A Crowd-Sourced
    List," at "Experiments," RSHHGG Lab,
    <https://rshhgglab.com/experiments/>.

[^39]: Katie Rawson and Trevor Muñoz, "Toward Collective Models of
    Digital Scholarship," *OSF*, 17 October 2018,
    <https://osf.io/j7qvk/>.
